Ministry

of

External

A n n u a l
2 0 0 4

Affairs

R e p o r t
–

2 0 0 5

Published by:
Joint Secretary, Policy Planning and Research, Ministry of External Affairs, New Delhi
This Annual Report can also be accessed at website:
www.meaindia.nic.in
Front Cover:
Illustration of Central Secretariat buildings taken from original water colour painting
by Shri Kashi Nath Das
Designed and printed by:
Cyberart Informations Pvt. Ltd.
Kanu Chambers, 3rd Floor, C-2, Sanwal Nagar, New Delhi 110 049, INDIA
Telefax: 26256148/26250700
E mail: cyberart@vsnl.com

Contents

Executive Summary

i-viii

1.

India’s Neighbours

1

2.

South East Asia and the Pacific

23

3.

East Asia

39

4.

Eurasia

46

5.

The Gulf , West Asia and North Africa

52

6.

Africa (South of Sahara)

61

7.

Europe

79

8.

The Americas

95

9.

United Nations and International Organisations

106

10.

Multilateral Economic Relations

125

11.

Technical Cooperation

131

12.

Investment and Trade Promotion

133

13.

Policy Planning and Research

134

14.

External Publicity

135

15.

Protocol

139

16.

Passport, Visa and Consular Services

145

17.

Administration and Establishment

148

18.

Coordination

151

19.

Non Resident Indians and People of Indian Origin Overseas

152

20.

Foreign Service Institute

153

21.

Implementation of Official Language Policy and
Propagation of Hindi Abroad

155

22.

Gender Issues

157

23.

Cultural Relations

158

24.

Indian Council of World Affairs

163

25.

Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS)

165

26.

Library

170

27.

Welfare

171

Appendices
Appendix I

Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad
during 2004-2005 (including posts budgeted by Ministry of Commerce
& those held in abeyance/ ex-cadred)

173

Appendix II

Recruitment made in various groups in the Ministry of External Affairs
and reserved vacancies filled by Schedule Caste/Schedule Tribe/Other
Backward Classes(OBC) categories from April to November 2004

174

Appendix III

Language-wise Statement of Officers (Grade - I to Junior Scale
of IFS) as on 30 November 2004

174

Appendix IV

Statement showing the number of applications received and
passports issued including under Tatkaal Scheme, miscellaneous
applications received and services rendered as well as Revenue
(including revenue under Tatkaal Scheme) and Expenditure figures
of the Passport Offices from 1st January 2004 to 31December 2004

175

Appendix V

Finances of the Ministry of External Affairs in 2004-2005

176

Appendix VI

The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2004-2005 Budget

176

Appendix VII

Principal Destinations of India’s Aid Programmes

177

Appendix VIII

C & AG Report of Ministry of External Affairs

178

Appendix IX

Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by
India with other Countries during the period January 2004 to
March 2005

179

Appendix X

Instruments of Full Powers Issued during the period January
2004 to December 2004

189

Appendix XI

Instruments of Ratification/Accession Issued during the Period
January 2004 to December 2004

190

Appendix XII

Conferences/Seminars/Meetings/ Study projects organised/undertaken
by Institutions/NGOs which were partly funded by Policy Planning &
Research Division

192

Appendix XIII

Expenditure Statement for the period April 2004 - January 2005
(ITEC & SCAAP Programmes)

196

Appendix XIV

List of Institutes offering ‘B’ and ‘C’ Category Courses to Foreign
Nominees under ITEC/SCAAP Schemes (2004-2005)

197

Appendix XV

Allocation and utilisation of Civilian Training Slots under
ITEC and SCAAP (2004-05)

199

Appendix XVI

Military Training Slots Allotted to various Countries during the
period April-November 2004 under ITEC/SAP

201

Appendix XVII

List of ITEC Experts presently stationed (November 2004)

203

Appendix XVIII

Aid for Disaster Relief

206

Appendix XIX

Gender-Related Statistics

206

Appendix XX

Seminars/Conferences/Round Tables Talks Organised by ICWA
from April 2004

207

Appendix XXI

Select Conferences/Workshops/Seminars Organised by RIS

209

Abbreviations

211

Executive Summary

T

Neighbours

here has been a healthy tradition of national consensus
in the conduct of India’s Foreign Policy. The United
Progressive Alliance (UPA) Government led by the Congress
Party under the leadership of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh, on assumption of power in May 2004, entrusted the
External Affairs portfolio to Shri K. Natwar Singh, a career
diplomat and veteran in the conduct of foreign policy and
international relations. He is assisted by two Ministers of
State, Shri E. Ahamed and Shri Rao Inderjit Singh. Shri
Shyam Saran took over as Foreign Secretary from Shri
Shashank on 1 August 2004.

The logic of geography is unrelenting and proximity is the
most difficult and testing among diplomatic challenges a
country faces. While globalization has brought many benefits
and opportunities for development and enrichment of our
lives, there are also fears of losing one’s identity and of being
overwhelmed by the powerful and technologically advanced
societies.
India is today one of the most dynamic and fastest growing
economies of the world. It constitutes not only a vast and
growing market, but also a competitive source of technologies
and knowledge-based services. Countries across the globe
are beginning to see India as an indispensable economic
partner and seeking mutually rewarding economic and
commercial links with its emerging economy. Should not
India’s neighbours also seek to share in the prospects for
mutual prosperity India offers to them? Do countries in our
neighbourhood envisage their own security and development
in cooperation with India or in hostility to India or by seeking
to isolate themselves from India against the logic of our
geography?

The guiding principles of India’s Foreign Policy have been
founded on Panchsheel, pragmatism and pursuit of national
interest. In a period of rapid and continuing change, foreign
policy must be capable of responding optimally to new
challenges and opportunities. It has to be an integral part of
the larger effort of building the nation’s capabilities through
economic development, strengthening social fabric and wellbeing of the people and protecting India’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. India’s foreign policy is a forward-looking
engagement with the rest of the world, based on a rigorous,
realistic and contemporary assessment of the bilateral,
regional and global geo-political and economic milieu.

Some neighbours have taken advantage of India’s strengths
and are reaping both economic and political benefits as a
result. Others are not. If globalisation implies that no country
can develop in an autarchic environment, is this not true
even more for countries within a region? If SAARC is to
evolve into an organisation relevant to the aspirations of the
peoples of South Asia, then these questions will need deep
reflection and honest answers.

The UPA Government accorded high priority to continuing
the composite dialogue with Pakistan and further
strengthening the already existing close relations with
neighbouring countries and India’s extended
neighbourhood. Major world powers, notably the permanent
members of the UN Security Council, Brazil, Egypt,
Germany, Japan, Mauritius, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa
and ASEAN countries, engaged the Ministry’s high
attention. But even greater priority and attention was
accorded to countries in Africa, Latin America and Small
Island countries in India’s bid to forge new partnerships of
mutual advantage, thereby contributing towards the process
of socio-economic development and building world peace.

India would like the whole of South Asia to emerge as a
community of flourishing democracies. India believes that
democracy would provide a more enduring and broad-based
foundation for an edifice of peace and cooperation in subcontinent. Half a century of political experience in South
Asia has provided a clear lesson that while expediency may
yield short term advantage, it also leads to a harmful corrosion
of our core values of respect for pluralism and human rights.
The interests of the people of South Asia sharing a common
history and destiny, requires that we remain alert to the

Even though India is not a traditional donor country, nearly
1,300 crores rupees were spent in providing overseas
development aid to friendly countries.

i

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

possible dangers we face when attempts are made to
extinguish a democratic order or yield space to extremist
and communal forces. While democracy remains India’s
abiding conviction, the importance of its neighbourhood
requires that India remains engaged with whichever
government is exercising authority in any country in its
neighbourhood.

projects in the fields of roads, railways, power, science and
technology, communications and information technology.
Further, Myanmar is emerging as an important partner in
strengthening India’s energy security.
Nepal: India is deeply concerned about the political and
security situation in Nepal, following the dissolution of the
multi-party Government, declaration of emergency and
arrest of political leaders by the King of Nepal on 1 February
2005. These developments in Nepal constitute a serious
setback to the cause of democracy, which would only benefit
the anti-constitutional forces. India has always believed that
the challenges being faced by Nepal can be addressed
effectively only on the basis of national consensus. In this
context, we have called for an early revival of normal
democratic processes in Nepal. On its part, India will
continue to support all efforts for the restoration of political
stability and economic prosperity in Nepal.

India is prepared to throw open its markets to all the
neighbours. India is prepared to invest capital in rebuilding
and upgrading cross-border infrastructure with each one of
them. In a word, India is prepared to make its neighbours
full stakeholders in India’s economic destiny and, through
such cooperation, in creating a truly vibrant and globally
competitive South Asian Economic Community.
Afghanistan: Bilateral relations between India and
Afghanistan attained a new level of intensity and
cooperation. There were regular political interactions
between the two countries. Prime Minister, in his meeting
with President Karzai in New York on the sidelines of UN
General Assembly, underlined India’s commitment to further
strengthen bilateral relations between the two countries and
also reiterated India’s support for the economic
reconstruction effort in Afghanistan. India’s present
commitments add up to US $ 400 million over the period
2002-2008, which is a substantial amount for a non-traditional
donor.

Pakistan: The Government pursued a proactive policy of
constructive engagement to establish peaceful, friendly and
cooperative relations with Pakistan with the larger objective
of cementing a viable structure of peace and stability in
South Asia. Based on the solemn commitment given by the
President of Pakistan on 6 January 2004 in Islamabad not to
permit any territory under Pakistan’s control to be used to
support terrorism, the two countries maintained their
Composite Dialogue in 2004-05. The engagement has
resulted in significant achievements such as restoration of
relations at the level of High Commissioners, enhanced
people-to-people and institutional contacts, and increased
communication links. Significantly, the Ceasefire has held
since November 2003. Both countries are currently
negotiating various proposals, which will enhance security,
improve economic cooperation, and intitutionalize bilateral
contacts. The year 2004-05 also witnessed high level contacts
such as meeting between Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh and President General Pervez Musharraf in New York
on 21 September 2004, and Pakistan PM Shaukat Aziz’s
visit to India from 22-23 November 2004. External Affairs
Minister met the Foreign Minister of Pakistan on 5-6
September 2004 in Delhi to review the overall progress in
the Composite Dialogue and made a bilateral visit to
Pakistan from 15-17 February 2005, where it was agreed to
commence the Muzzafarabad-Srinagar Bus Service w.e.f. 7
April 2005 and start a bus service from Amritsar to Lahore,
including to religious places such as Nankana Sahib.

Bangladesh, Maldives and Sri Lanka: India maintained
close relations with Bangladesh, Maldives and Sri Lanka.
India’s quick response in providing relief assistance to Sri
Lanka and Maldives following the tragic 26 December 2004
Tsunami devastation, has been widely recognised.
Bhutan: India’s relations with Bhutan are characterised by
a high level of mutual understanding, trust and confidence.
The regular exchange of high level visits imparts new
dynamism and momentum to our growing and mutually
beneficial cooperation. His Majesty King Jigme Singye
Wangchuck of Bhutan was the Chief Guest at the Republic
Day celebrations in January this year.
Myanmar: India’s policy of constructive engagement with
Myanmar continued during 2004-05. Senior General Than
Shwe, Chairman of the State Peace and Development
Council (SPDC) of Myanmar paid a State visit to India
from 24-29 October 2004. He categorically stated that
Myanmar would not allow its territory to be used for insurgent
activity against India. India is also working towards economic
development and integration of the North Eastern states
with Myanmar by developing mutually beneficial cross border

Iran: The year 2004-05 saw further deepening and
consolidation of India-Iran ties. The increased momentum
of high-level exchanges, institutional linkages between their
ii

Executive Summary

National Security Councils and Joint Commission Meeting
were the highlights in 2004-05. The common resolve to impart
a strategic character to the relationship was conceptualized
and expounded in the New Delhi Declaration, signed in
January 2003, which touches upon all aspects of bilateral
relations as well as regional and global issues of mutual
concern.

Japan: The period 2004-05 was an active year in bilateral
relations between India and Japan. The momentum of
exchanges between the two countries continued during the
year in pursuance of the Global Partnership for the 21st
Century that India and Japan jointly established in 2000 to
broaden and deepen bilateral relations. Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh met Prime Minister of Japan Mr. Junichiro
Koizumi on the sidelines of ASEAN Summit in Vientiane,
Laos on 29 November 2004 during which both leaders
discussed issues of mutual concern. Japanese Foreign
Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi visited India from 12-14 August
2004. Both sides agreed to support each other’s candidature
for permanent seat in the expanded UN Security Council
and closely work together towards realizing the reform of
the UN Security Council.

South East Asia and Pacific
India’s relations with countries of South East Asia and the
Pacific continued to broaden and intensify during the year.
Important visitors from the region were Prime Ministers of
Singapore, New Zealand and Malaysia. The Foreign Minister
of Solomon Islands visited India in January 2005. External
Affairs Minister attended a Special ASEAN Leaders’
Summit in Jakarta in the aftermath of the Tsunami disaster.
He visited Indonesia to participate in the 11th ARF Meeting
and during the visit, a bilateral MoU on Cooperation to
Combat International Terrorism was signed with Indonesia.
He also signed separate MoUs with Laos, Myanmar and
Vietnam for setting up Entrepreneurship development
Centres by India in the three capitals. The first of such
Centres was inaugurated by External Affairs Minister in
Vientiane on 27 November 2004.

Republic of Korea (ROK): The year 2004-05 marked the
30th Anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations
between India and the ROK. President Mr.Roh Moo-hyun’s
visit to India from 4-6 October 2004 gave further impetus to
bilateral relations. External Affairs Minister visited ROK from
14-16 December 2004 to co-chair the third session of the
India-ROK Joint Commission.

Eurasia

East Asia

India’s relationship of friendship, warmth and mutual support
with the countries of the Commonwealth Independent States
(CIS) region was further strengthened during the year. A
‘Focus CIS’ programme was launched to provide a boost to
economic and trade relations. High level visits were
exchanged on a regular basis with the countries of the region.
These were complemented by the visits of trade delegations
and through participation in industrial and consumer goods
exhibitions. Indian cultural festivals and media exchanges
have further enhanced the scope of India’s relations with
the region.

China: India continued to view bilateral relations with
China in a positive spirit, seeking friendly, cooperative, goodneighbourly and mutually beneficial relations on the basis
of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and mutual
sensitivity to each other’s concerns and aspirations. India
also maintained its commitment to the process of dialogue
to resolve outstanding differences and to build a long-term
constructive and cooperative relationship with China,
marked by continuity, consolidation, and sustained
momentum of high-level dialogue. Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh met Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao on 30
November 2004 on the sidelines of the 3rd India-ASEAN
Summit in Vientiane, Laos. Bilateral dialogue mechanism
was strengthened with the introduction of the Strategic
Dialogue, which was held between Foreign Secretary and
Chinese Vice Foreign Minister in New Delhi on 24 January
2005. Confidence Building Measures between the two
militaries were further strengthened through exchanges/
interactions at various levels. India-China trade maintained
its momentum of growth and crossed the US$ 13 billion
mark in 2004. A notable event during the year was the
commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of Panchsheel
which was jointly propounded by India and China, with
events organised in the capitals of both countries.

Indo-Russian relations are a matter of considerable
importance to both the countries. This year witnessed a
concerted effort by both the sides to transform cooperation
from a declaratory stage to a constructive phase. The visit
by President Vladimir V Putin to India from 3-5 December
2004 for the fifth India-Russia Annual Summit provided an
occasion for both the countries to review the state of their
bilateral relations, discuss regional and international issues
of mutual concern and to provide a bilateral focus on energy,
IT, banking and other areas of high technology.
The third trilateral meeting of the Foreign Ministers of
Russia, China and India was held on 21 October 2004 at
Almaty on the sidelines of the CICA Foreign Ministers’
iii

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Gulf Countries

Meeting. They exchanged views on issues of regional and
international interest, and agreed to explore the possibility
of trilateral economic cooperation.

The year 2004-05 witnessed significant developments in
India’s relations with the Gulf countries including the visit
by External Affairs Minister to Oman and UAE in December
2004, Kuwaiti Foreign Minister to India in August 2004,
Minister of State Shri E. Ahamed to Saudi Arabia (June &
November 2004), Bahrain(August 2004), Qatar (October
2004), Oman (November 2004) and Yemen & Kuwait
(February 2005). Signing of the Framework Agreement on
Economic Cooperation between India and GCC is a
landmark development. President of India visited Abu Dhabi
in November 2004 to condole the death of President Sheikh
Zayed. The Conference of Heads of Mission in West Asia
was held in Dubai under the Chairmanship of External
Affairs Minister to give a fresh direction and thrust to our
diplomatic efforts in the region. India participated in the
Iraq Donors Conference in Doha (May 2004) Tokyo
(October 2004). Three Indian nationals, who were held
hostage by an Iraqi militant group in July 2004, were released
unharmed after sustained diplomatic efforts. Extradition
Treaties were signed with Kuwait and Oman. The GCC
countries extended broad support to India’s candidature for
Permanent Membership of the Security Council.

Europe
India’s engagement with the individual countries in Europe
and the European Union continued to grow during the year.
Interactions were marked by regular exchanges of visits,
including at the highest level, demonstrating a mutual desire
to deepen and diversify bilateral relations. India shared a
strategic relationship with France, Germany and UK and
growing ties with a number of other countries in Europe,
aimed at promoting more intensive bilateral cooperation over
a wide range of areas. The 5th India-EU Summit, held at
The Hague in November 2004, was a landmark in India’s
relations with the EU, for it launched the India-EU Strategic
Partnership in recognition of India’s growing stature as a
major regional and global player. Interactions with individual
member countries in Europe reflected a shared
understanding on various international issues. On the debate
of the UN reforms, India was able to garner significant
support from several EU Member States. India and Germany,
in a strategic move, agreed to support each other’s
candidature in an expanded UNSC.

West Asia and North Africa

Economic considerations continue to underpin India’s strong
ties with countries in Europe. EU Member States’ desire to
enter into bilateral agreements/MoUs for enhanced S&T
cooperation in niche areas of technology, demonstrate the
growing recognition of India’s potential in this area. The
civil society dialogue with the major European countries,
represented by the different Eminent Persons Group,
contributed to strengthening the multi-faceted relationship.

India’s relationship with West Asia and North Africa
(WANA) region received further boost during the year.
High level visits included visits of Moroccan Prime Minister
and Israeli Vice Prime Minister to India. The visit of
Moroccan PM was the first high level visit from the Arab
world to India since June 2005. A high-level delegation
including a Cabinet Minister led by External Affairs Minister
attended the funeral of President Arafat at Cairo on 12
November 2004. Economic relations between India and
WANA region showed a substantial growth, particularly
with Libya and Israel. India has entered the hydrocarbon
sector in Sudan, Libya, Egypt and Syria through acquisition
of stakes in oil exploration and gas distribution. Mr.
Mahmoud Abbas was elected as the new President of the
Palestinian National Authority following the demise of
President Yasser Arafat. A significant development was the
resumption of the peace dialogue between the Israel and
Palestinian leadership at Sharm Al Sheikh Summit on 8
February 2005. India has appointed Special Envoy to the
West Asia and Middle East Peace Process.

India has traditionally enjoyed friendly and substantive
relations with 29 countries of the Europe-II Division, created
in the Ministry in March 2004. The year under review saw
epochal changes in the eco-political geometry of the region.
On 2 April 2004 seven East European countries, viz. Bulgaria,
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia
joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). A
month later, the European Union was enlarged to take ten
more Member States. By the year-end, the EU decided that
Bulgaria and Romania were on track to join the body in
2007/2008. The EU also decided to commence accession
negotiations with Croatia and Turkey. The EU being our
largest trading partner and source of investment, the ongoing
changes have direct implications for India. The Ministry
has encouraged and fostered high-level political interactions
and increased economic cooperation with all the countries.

East and Southern Africa
India’s relations with the East and Southern African countries
strengthened during the year. President of Zanzibar visited
India in March 2004. India’s Vice President visited South
iv

Executive Summary

Africa to participate in their 10th Freedom Day in April 2004.
Rashtrapatiji visited Tanzania and South Africa in September
2004. He had the rare honour of addressing the Pan-African
Parliament, the first non-African Head of State to do so.

contacts and dialogue. Both sides showed strong
commitment to engage across the wide spectrum of their
relationship that included strategic and security issues,
defence, counter-terrorism, counter-proliferation, science
and technology, health, trade, space, energy and
environment.

India participated in various peacekeeping operations in
Africa such as Burundi, Ivory Coast, DRC, etc. which had
been suffering from civil war, ethnic violence, etc. A large
contingent from the Indian army forms part of the UN Force,
which is keeping peace between Eritrea and Ethiopia. The
present commander of this force (UNMEE – United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea) is a senior army officer from
India.

The Prime Minister had a meeting with President Bush on
the sidelines of the UNGA in New York on 17 September
2004. The Joint Statement “US–India Partnership:
Cooperation & Trust” issued after the meeting laid out the
future directions of our relationship and noted that “bilateral
relations had never been as close as they were at present”.
The meeting served to underline its strategic dimension
including our commitment to combating WMD proliferation,
terrorism and enhancing global security. The leaders noted
that the implementation of first phase of the Next Steps in
Strategic Partnership (NSSP) marked the beginning of a
new era of cooperation and trust. Emphasis was also laid on
advancing economic cooperation in multilateral institutions
including WTO’s Doha Development Agenda, and through
bilateral mechanisms including the India-US Economic
Dialogue and the High Technology Cooperation Group
(HTCG).

There is universal recognition in Africa that India has now
become a major power in every sense of the word. This is
why most countries of Africa have enthusiastically endorsed
India’s candidature for a permanent seat in the UN Security
Council. The Indian communities in various African
countries have, in recent years, proved themselves as a
valuable bridge strengthening the relationship between India
and their countries of residence.

West Africa
India continued to enjoy cordial links with the countries of
West Africa. Indian Diplomatic Missions in West Africa were
strengthened and decision has also been taken to reopen
the Indian Embassy in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of
Congo. The region holds great promise for India’s energy
security and the Ministry took the initiative in exploring
possibilities to access the oil and petroleum sector in this
region, particularly in Angola, Nigeria, Cote d’Ivoire,
Mauritania and Equatorial Guinea. India also established its
close cooperation with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and High Commissioner of India
to Nigeria was made the Permanent Representative
accredited to the ECOWAS. Technical assistance and
development aid continued with food aid being given to
Cote d’Ivoire and Guinea. Anti-HIV drugs were also sent to
countries in this region. The President of Nigeria paid a
transit visit to India in November 2004 and had meeting
with Prime Minister. The launch of the new initiative TEAM9, a techno-economic cooperation venture between India
and eight countries of West Africa, was a major initiative
aimed at demonstrating the special focus that India was
putting on Africa in general and West Africa in particular.

High-level engagement at the political level continued
through the year. External Affairs Minister’s visit to
Washington DC in June 2004 and his meetings subsequently
with his US counterpart Secretary of State Colin Powell on
the sidelines of ARF on 1-2 July 2004 and again in January
2005 in the aftermath of Tsunami, both held in Jakarta,
served to establish and consolidate political level contacts
between the two countries after the formation of new
Government in India. On the US side, then Deputy
Secretary of State Richard Armitage, visited New Delhi on
13-14 July 2004; US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld
visited India on 8-9 December 2004.
Canada: The Prime Minister of Canada Mr. Paul Martin
visited India on 17-18 January 2005. In a Joint Statement
the two leaders agreed on the initiatives to strengthen and
enhance the architecture of India-Canada partnership and
contribute to global challenges more effectively. The two
Prime Ministers agreed that India and Canada should
enhance their dialogues on international, regional and global
strategic issues. Both leaders also recognized a multilateral
initiative for regional warning and natural disaster
preparedness as a priority. India and Canada continued to
actively promote bilateral trade and investment during the
year.

Americas
USA: India and US continued their intensive engagement
as reflected in the frequency and intensity of bilateral
v

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Latin American Countries (LAC)

Multilateral Economic Relations

The level of engagement of the Government of India with
the Latin American region continued to strengthen and
deepen in 2004. The thrust of policy towards the region is to
strengthen and widen the existing relationship, setting up a
mechanism for political dialogue and cooperation, and
enhancing trade and commerce. Framework agreements
are established with the regional groupings such as with the
MERCOSUR group of countries, Political Dialogue and
Cooperation mechanism with the CAN (Andean
Community), a standing Joint Commission on consultation,
cooperation and coordination with CARICOM and
mechanism of political consultations with the Central
American Group of countries (SICA).

In pursuance of the priority attached to India’s ‘Look East’
policy, the Government continued efforts to forge new links
and enhance economic cooperation with countries of Southeast and East Asia, a geographically contiguous, rapidly
growing and dynamic region with which India shares deeprooted cultural and civilizational ties. The 1st ever BIMSTEC
Summit was held in Bangkok on 30-31 July 2004. The 3rd
India-ASEAN Summit was held in Vientiane, Lao PDR on
29-30 November 2004 during which the landmark “India
ASEAN Partnership for Peace, Progress and Shared
Prosperity” document was signed. The first India-ASEAN
Motor Car Rally, starting from Guwahati in India and
concluding at Batam island in Indonesia from 23 November11 December 2004 after travelling through eight ASEAN
countries, was a resounding success.

United Nations and DISA
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the 59th session of the UN General Assembly
and in his address, reaffirmed India’s commitment to
multilateralism. Prime Minister emphasized the need to
reform the United Nations system including through
expansion of the Security Council, in both permanent and
non-permanent categories, to make it a truly representative
body. India is presently one of the leading troop contributors
to the UN peacekeeping operations.

IBSA: India is cooperating closely with Brazil and South
Africa, both bilaterally as well as within the framework of
the India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA) initiative. IBSA
provides a unique forum for trilateral cooperation among
the three countries.

Investment and Trade Promotion
The Ministry attaches top priority to economic diplomacy in
view of the need to protect and promote India’s economic
and commercial interests abroad in this era of globalization
and to face the challenges and exploit the opportunities
thrown up by the fast integrating world economy. This
includes promotion of trade, two-way foreign investments,
exports and increased engagement with regional groupings.
Greater emphasis is now laid on economic and commercial
part of our relations with friendly countries, particularly the
developing ones. The Ministry also believes in a close
partnership between Government and business and industry
in the pursuit of investment and export promotion goals,
and general economic cooperation.

India’s commitment to non-discriminatory and universal
nuclear disarmament and the global elimination of all
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) continued to be
reflected in its policy pronouncements and diplomatic
initiatives. The country’s stand on issues related to
disarmament and international security in various
multilateral and regional forums was premised on India’s
national security interests and its tradition of close
engagement with the international community to promote
cooperative efforts at addressing these challenges.
Bilateral dialogues with key countries continued to be
pursued this year and harmonisation of India’s national
imperatives and security obligations with international
concerns on non-proliferation and disarmament also
progressed steadily. On the regional level, India’s
participation in the confidence and security building process
and structure under the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)
and Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building
Measures in Asia (CICA) acquired greater momentum.
Regular contacts were maintained with key international
and non-governmental organisations active in the field of
disarmament with a view to disseminating India’s
perspectives on disarmament issues.

Policy Planning & Research
The Ministry maintained close interaction with several
academic and non-governmental organizations and
provided financial assistance for holding seminars and
undertaking research studies on matters of foreign policy
interest. External Affairs Minister has also constituted a
Foreign Policy Advisory Group and regular meetings were
held to understand and evaluate foreign policy options on
emerging major external issues of interest to India. Foreign
Policy dialogue was held with China in Beijing on 7
November 2004 and Canada in New Delhi on 28 February
2005.
vi

Executive Summary

External Publicity

Coordination

On External Publicity front, the Ministry continued to express
India’s perspective on various foreign policy issues with
emphasis on clear articulation of the foreign policy direction
of the UPA Government since its assumption of office in
May 2004. India’s intensive engagement with major powers,
neighbours and traditional friends naturally received high
publicity. The Ministry played a major role in keeping the
media abreast of all developments on the external front and
notably during the hostage crisis in Iraq and on India’s
Tsunami relief efforts. The work of the media delegations
was facilitated during incoming and outgoing VVIP visits.
The Ministry also commissioned several documentaries in
consonance with India’s foreign policy priorities, brought
out the monthly magazine “India Perspectives” and other
special publications on important issues and events besides
maintaining an active website www.meaindia.nic.in

Coordination Division is the nodal point of the Ministry for
all work relating to Parliament and for examination of
proposals for clearance of foreign tours of Ministers and
legislators of the Union and State Government, and
Government officials. This Division also handles clearance
for holding international conferences and international sports
events in India; participation by Indian sports persons in
overseas events; as well as diplomatic clearance for all nonscheduled flights. Observance of Anti-Terrorism Day,
Sadbhavana Diwas and Quami Ekta Week/Diwas and
processing of recommendations for grant of Padma Awards
in respect of nominations of foreign citizens were undertaken.
Coordination Division also administers the self-financing
scheme for admission of foreign students in selected
professional courses in India.

Protocol

The Foreign Service Institute continued its endeavour to
train foreign diplomats apart from training IFS Probationers
and other Ministry of External Affairs officials. Three
Professional Courses for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD) and two
Advanced Courses on Asia for Foreign Diplomats (ACAFD)
and a Special Course for Palestinian Diplomats (SCPD),
were conducted by the Institute during the year. A Special
Course for Canadian Diplomats is to be conducted from 2124 March 2005. The Virtual Campus of FSI, set up in
consultation with Indira Gandhi National Open University
(IGNOU) to impart Mid-Career Training to serving Indian
diplomats, was inaugurated by the External Affairs Minister
on 27 July 2004. The Institute also conducted a two-week
residential mid-career Module on Foreign Policy, Security,
Economic and Regional Issues for serving Indian diplomats
who have completed 18-20 years of service. MoU for
Cooperation with Foreign Service Institutes of Bulgaria,
Venezuela and Afghanistan were signed during the year.

Foreign Service Institute (FSI)

The Ministry remained fully engaged with the growing
number of incoming and outgoing high-level visits,
conferences, credential ceremonies, official entertainment
and other multifarious functions. The Ministry’s ability to
handle a large number of visits of foreign dignitaries also
contributed to India’s enhanced international image and
profile. Streamlining of protocol norms and standards
continued to be a matter of priority.

Consular, Passport & Visa Services
The consular, passport and visa services rendered by the
Ministry are its public interface in India and abroad. All the
30 passport offices in India are computerized and issued
machine printed and machine-readable passports. As part
of the decentralization scheme, approximately 400 district
passport cells (DPCs) have been opened in 25 States at district
level. This has helped in decongestion of passport offices.
The innovative ‘Tatkal’ scheme for out of turn issue of
passports at an extra fee has helped to meet the growing
demand for issuance of passports in cases of urgency. Teleenquiry system is available in 22 passport offices and a touchscreen enquiry kiosk has been introduced in Passport Office,
Bangalore on pilot basis. All Missions and posts abroad
continued to efficiently meet the Consular needs of overseas
Indians. Bilateral agreements with several countries were
signed in order to provide a legal and institutional framework
to combat organized crime, international terrorism and drug
trafficking and growing international dimensions of financial
crimes.

Administration
Ministry made optimum utilization of available resources in
order to ensure its efficient functioning, both at
Headquarters and in the 162 Indian Missions/Posts abroad.
In order to have adequate number of qualified personnel
manning the Ministry and also to provide adequate
promotional avenues to officers/staff, Cadre Reviews of IFS
and IFS ‘B’ were completed during the year. The 4th Cadre
Review of IFS was aimed at having sufficient number of
officers, both at senior and junior levels. The first ever Cadre
Review of IFS (B) was implemented to streamline the much
needed support staff, as well as to provide relief from
vii

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

stagnation in promotions at various grades. The Ministry
also continued with new steps to make the best use of
technological resources. As part of a seamless e-governance
project, measures like development of a Personnel
Information System (PIS), name-based and designationbased e-mail IDs, creation of on-line databases, etc. were
carried out.
Consistent with the Government’s policy of promotion and
propagation of Hindi, the Ministry has been making special
efforts to support use of Hindi language. All important
documents like bilateral treaties, MoUs, Credentials,
Speeches of President and Prime Minister, Annual Report
of the Ministry and replies to Parliament Questions were
issued bilingually. Most Missions/Posts abroad are now enabled
to entertain correspondence in Hindi. 43 students from 18
countries were admitted in the Kendriya Hindi Sansthan,
Agra. A Regional Hindi Conference was organized in
Romania for propagation of Hindi abroad. A high-level
Committee under Minister of State was set up to promote
introduction of Hindi as a language in the UN. A Hindi
Fortnight was organized in the Ministry in September 2004.
Hindi forms an integral part of the Foreign Service Institute’s
training programmes.
Since its very inception, the Indian Foreign Service has been
open to women. The Ministry stays committed to ensuring
gender equality in all spheres of its functioning and provides
equal opportunities to women officers to take up challenging
and prestigious assignments. Women officers are occupying
positions of prominence, both at Headquarters and Missions/
Posts abroad.

Cultural Relations
The Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR),
established in the year 1950, has been functioning as the
autonomous cultural wing of the Ministry of External Affairs
for furthering the objectives and mandate of India’s foreign
policy. ICCR’s “cultural diplomacy” plays a significant role
in strengthening bilateral cultural relations among the
nations. ICCR’s activities also contribute to creating
awareness about India and its rich cultural heritage among
the people of other countries. The ICCR fulfils its objectives
through activities undertaken by the Indian Cultural
Centres and Chairs of Indian Studies abroad, scholarship
schemes for overseas students, publications, organizing events
of performing/non-performing arts in India and abroad, etc.
The Council has nine regional offices in different States of
India.

Indian Council for World Affairs (ICWA)
In consonance with the objectives of the Indian Council of
World Affairs Act, 2001, ICWA carried on its various
activities by organizing special addresses, seminars and
meetings on important world affairs. Amongst the dignitaries
who delivered special address at Sapru House during the
year include H.E. Dr. Cheikh Tidiane Gadio, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Senegal; H.E. Mr. Jorge
Heine, Ambassador of Chile; H.H. Prince Radu of
Hohenzollern-Veringen, Romania; H.E. Mr. Yasakuni Enoki,
Ambassador of Japan and H.E. Mr. Heimo Richter,
Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany. A major
International Seminar to commemorate 50 years of
‘Panchsheel’ was addressed by the External Affairs Minister
Shri K. Natwar Singh and attended by several foreign
dignitaries. Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for
External Affairs, addressed an International Seminar on
‘Emerging Trends in Indo-African Relations’. Shri E.
Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs, addressed
the seminar on Security and Political Situation in Iraq. The
3rd Africa Day Lecture was delivered on 2 June 2004 by
Foreign Secretary Shri Shashank. A panel discussion on the
Report of the UNSG’s High Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change was held on 30 December 2004
with Shri Shyam Saran, Foreign Secretary, delivering the
keynote address.

Research and Information System for
Developing Countries (RIS)
RIS is as an autonomous policy think-tank funded by the
Ministry. During the year 2004-05, RIS conducted policy
research on international economic issues and provided
analytical support in preparation for major Summit meetings
and other important negotiations. RIS lent its support in
preparations for the ASEAN-India Summit, BIMSTEC
Ministerial Meeting, NAM Ministerial Meeting, SAARC
Ministerial Meeting, UNCTAD XI, the ongoing WTO
negotiations, and the bilateral joint study groups on
comprehensive economic dialogue with China, South
Korea, and various FTA negotiations, among others. It held
policy dialogue on the relevance and the way forward for
an Asian Economic Community in Tokyo, in collaboration
with leading policy think-tanks in Asia, and has networked
with policy think-tanks in other countries to bring policy
coherence and capacity-building on international economic
issues and development cooperation.

viii

India’s Neighbours

India has always accorded priority to relations with its

1

September 2004 in New York, during his visit to New
York for the UN General Assembly. The two leaders
discussed bilateral issues, including Indian assistance to
Afghanistan’s reconstruction as well as the presidential
elections in Afghanistan. Prime Minister underlined
India’s commitment to further strengthen bilateral
relations between the two countries and also reiterated
India’s support for the economic reconstruction effort in
Afghanistan. Expressing appreciation for India’s
contribution to Afghanistan’s economic reconstruction
and rehabilitation, President Karzai sought India’s
continued cooperation in every sphere, including
rebuilding of state institutions.

neighbours and maintained close ties with them.
Institutional mechanisms with all these countries were
reinvigorated and cooperation expanded in diverse areas
to mutual benefit. High-level exchanges reflecting the
friendship and increasing understanding of each other’s
interest and common goals were intensified. A significant
development in the case of Sri Lanka and Maldives was
India’s quick response to their request for relief assistance
following the tragic Tsunami devastation on 26 December
2004. Although India itself was under pressure in dealing
with its own devastation caused by Tsunami, but it acted
swiftly. India dispatched immediately, on the 26th itself,
relief supplies, medical teams and assistance to Sri Lanka
and Maldives by air and sea, which helped in providing
succour to the victims. The Indian teams have since been
working in the relief operations by providing medical aid,
food, water, clothing, prevention of outbreak of epidemic
and assisting in rehabilitation projects for the displaced.
India’s assistance has been widely appreciated in these
countries as well as internationally.

Dr. Abdullah Abdullah, Foreign Minister of Afghanistan
paid an official visit to India from 31 August – 3 September
2004. Apart from delegation level talks with the External
Affairs Minister, Dr. Abdullah called on Prime Minister
and National Security Adviser. An MoU on Mutual
Cooperation between the Foreign Service Institute of the
Ministry of External Affairs and the Institute of Diplomacy
of the Foreign Affairs Ministry of Afghanistan was signed
during the visit. Under the MoU Foreign Service Institute
of the Ministry of External Affairs will assist the Institute
of Diplomacy of the Foreign Affairs Ministry of
Afghanistan in training and building expertise of the
diplomatic cadre of Afghanistan.

India continued to provide development assistance to a
large number of projects in each of the neighbouring
countries that showcased its expertise in information
technology, human resource development, infrastructure
engineering (roads and waterways) railways, etc. Cultural
and educational exchanges with neighbours grew and
India continued to host an increasing number of students
for higher studies and training.

The National Security Adviser (late) J. N. Dixit paid a
visit to Kabul on 19 October 2004. He called on President
Karzai, Vice-President & Defence Minister Marshal Fahim
and Foreign Minister Dr. Abdullah. Earlier, to establish
contact with the new government, Afghanistan National
Security Adviser, Dr. Zalmai Rasool visited Delhi on 30
May 2004. He called on External Affairs Minister and
National Security Adviser.

Afghanistan
India and Afghanistan have long history of friendship and
cultural affinity. Bilateral relations between the two
countries have attained a new level of intensity and
cooperation. There were regular political interactions
between the two countries. India has continued and built
further upon its economic and financial assistance
forAfghanistan’s rehabilitation and reconstruction
process.

India has continued with its assistance programmes/
projects for the economic reconstruction of Afghanistan.
India’s present commitments add up to US $ 400 million
over the period 2002-2008, which is a substantial amount
for a non-traditional donor. The break up of the
commitment is as under:

Prime Minister called on President Karzai on 21
1

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

India had announced an assistance of US$ 100
million for Afghanistan at Tokyo Donors Conference
in January 2002. Of this assistance, US$ 88.11
million have been operationalised/committed till
date on various projects.
India has announced food assistance of 1 million
tons of wheat (equivalent to US$ 100 million) to
Afghanistan. A part of this assistance is being
converted into high protein biscuits for school
feeding programme in Afghanistan and supplied
through World Food Programme. The first tranche
of 9526 tons of biscuits against 85517 metric tons
of wheat was sent to Afghanistan from November
2002 to June 2003. The delivery of the second
tranche of 7496 metric tons of biscuits against 76521
metric tons of wheat was carried out from December
2003 to August 2004. The delivery of the 3rd
tranche of 18,000 metric tons of biscuits against
1,28,856 metric tons of wheat has commenced from
November 2004. As a result of the programme,
around one million Afghan school children are
receiving a package of 100 gms of biscuits every day.
The Government approved Rs. 377.47 crore (aprox.
US$ 84 million) for upgradation/reconstruction of
the road from Zaranj to Delaram in Afghanistan.
Work on the project has commenced.

ii)

Reconstruction and completion of Salma Dam
Power Project in Herat province in Afghanistan at
an estimated cost of Rs. 351.87 crore. The Project
involves construction of a 107.5 m high earth and
rock fill dam to divert water for power generation,
with a total installed capacity of 52 MW. Water and
Power Consultancy Services (India) Ltd.
(WAPCOS) will implement the project.

iii)

Under food assistance of 1 million tons of wheat,
the delivery of the 3rd tranche of 18,000 tons of
biscuits against 1,28,856 metric tons of wheat has
commenced from November 2004.

iv)

Around 69 tons of medical stores were supplied to
Indian Medical Missions at Kabul, Mazar-e-Sharif,
Shibergan, Herat and Kandahar.

v)

Essential medical equipments were supplied for
rehabilitation and modernization of Indira Gandhi
Institute of Child Health.

vi)

Eight paramedics from Afghanistan were provided
training at Indraprastha Apollo Hospital for a period
of three months from 19 May 2004 to 18 August
2004.

vii) Two doctors from Indira Gandhi Institute of Child
Health attended training in areas of their
specialization at All India Institute of Medical
Sciences from 15 July 2004 to 13 October 2004.

The Cabinet approved the proposal for
reconstruction and completion of Salma Dam Power
Project in Herat province in Afghanistan at an
estimated cost of Rs. 351.87 crore (approx. US$76.7
at July 2004 exchange rate).

viii) In-service training was provided to 20 teachers from
the Afghan Ministry of Education at Sanskriti
School, New Delhi from 15 July 2004 to 6 October
2004.

The Government of India has offered to fund the
construction of a new Parliament building in
Afghanistan.
India is contributing US $ 200,000 per annum to
the World Bank managed Afghan Reconstruction
Trust Fund.

ix)

In-service training was provided to twenty Afghan
teachers from the Ministry of Education of
Afghanistan by Delhi Public School Society from 5
February to 5 May 2004.

x)

As part of the projects on revamping/ restoration of
information set up in Afghanistan, Broadcast
Engineering Consultants India Ltd completed the
work on setting up of a modern Offset Printing
Machine along with DTP Facility and setting up of
TV Satellite uplink at Kabul and downlink facility
at 10 stations. Work is underway on setting up of a
new 100 kw SW transmitter in Kabul and
restoration/ augmentation of TV hardware in
Jalalabad and Nangarhar Province.

xi)

50,000 indelible ink marker pens were provided to
Joint Electoral Management Body (JEMB),

Some of the important projects operationalised during the
period 2004-05 are as follows:
i)

Reconstruction/upgradation of Zaranj-Delaram road
(218 kms) at an estimated cost of Rs. 377.47 crore.
The project will be executed by Border Roads
Organization. Apart from being a sign of our
commitment to assist Afghanistan in infrastructure
reconstruction, the project would also address the
transit problem that Indian exporter face in sending
goods to Afghanistan.
2

India’s Neighbours

the momentum imparted to cooperative bilateral relations
initiated in recent years.

responsible for Afghanistan’s voter registration
programme and conduct of elections, for use in the
presidential elections. Mysore Paints & Varnish Ltd.,
a Government of Karnataka Undertaking supplied
the indelible ink, which is the sole supplier of
indelible ink to Election Commission of India.

The Commerce Minister of Bangladesh Air vice Marshal
Altaf Hossain Chowdhury visited India from 16-18
November 2004 at the invitation of the Indian Minister
of Commerce and Industry. During the visit, he met
External Affairs Minister besides his meetings with the
CII and FICCI. He also addressed a seminar jointly
organised by FICCI and the Minister of Commerce and
Industry. The visit provided an opportunity to discuss
several economic issues between the two countries.

xii) Five bank officers have been deputed to assist the
restructuring of Afghanistan’s Milli Bank.
xiii) Central Warehousing Corporation commenced the
work on the construction of a cold storage of 5000ton capacity in Kandahar.
xiv) Of 105 utility vehicles/equipments (water tankers,
rear drop tippers, dump trucks, bulldozers, motor
graders and garbage tippers) provided to the Kabul
Municipality, 94 vehicles/equipments have been
handed over to the Afghan authorities.

The Finance Minister of Bangladesh Saifur Rehman was
in India for the CII Economic Summit in December 2004.
He called on PM and held talks with his counterpart,
Finance Minister Shri P. Chidambram.
The Home Secretary level talks were also held in Dhaka
after a gap of nearly four years. The meeting provided an
opportunity to discuss the entire gamut of issues related
to the land boundary, security, border management and
other consular and visa related issues. During the talks,
Bangladesh agreed to provide double entry and exit visas
to Indian citizens transiting through any international
airport and/or land port.

The developments in Afghanistan since the Bonn
Agreement of December 2001 can be assessed positively.
The successful conclusion of the presidential elections
was a historic milestone in Afghanistan’s history. However,
the process of peace and stabilization in Afghanistan is
still fragile. Taliban, Al Qaeda and Hizb-e-Islami elements,
with support from outside, continue to pose a threat to
peace and security. This has been compounded by the
continued increase in the cultivation, production and
trafficking of narcotic drugs that could undermine the
political and economic reconstruction of Afghanistan and
has potentially dangerous repercussions for the region and
beyond.

The seventh meeting of the Indo-Bangladesh Joint
Committee of experts (JCE), chaired by the Water
Resources Secretaries of the two countries was held in
Dhaka in September 2004. The meeting considered the
report of the Joint Technical Group (JTG) set up to discuss
technical issues for the sharing of waters of the Teesta
river.

Bangladesh
India has very deep historical, cultural and social
affiliations with Bangladesh. The institutional mechanisms
that govern various aspects of our bilateral ties have
diversified in recent years.

Institutional dialogue on key issues related to border
management continued through the biannual DG level
talks between the Border Security Force (BSF) and the
Bangladesh Rifles (BDR). Several operational and field
level issues to increase cooperation and confidence
building measures were discussed. Other issues like
coordinated patrolling to tackle cross border crimes and
peaceful border management were also discussed.

The year was marked by high level political visits from
Bangladesh. Foreign Minister of Bangladesh (BDFM) Mr.
M. Morshed Khan visited India as the special envoy of
the Prime Minister of Bangladesh (BDPM) from 31 May
– 4 June 2004 to congratulate the new government upon
assuming charge. The visit provided an opportunity to
discuss issues related to security and other matters of
bilateral concern. BDFM also visited India from 31
October to 2 November 2004 as the special envoy of
BDPM to invite Indian Prime Minister for the 13th South
Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC)
summit to be held at Dhaka in January 2004. Both sides
reiterated their commitment to enhance as well as sustain

Pursuant to a proposal offered during the 6th Joint
Economic Commission (JEC) meeting in July 2003, the
GOI has sponsored 250 Bangladeshi teachers in computer
training in New Delhi under the Aid to Bangladesh
Programme. The programme was conducted by Tata
Infotech and involved 6 weeks of training for the
candidates selected by the Bangladesh government.
It was also during the 6th JEC meeting that discussions
3

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

were held on a possible new line of credit to Bangladesh.
Presently negotiations are on to discuss the terms and
conditions and modalities of the proposed $150 million
EXIM bank credit line to Bangladesh for funding
infrastructure related projects in the rail and road sectors.

construction of 1020 MW Tala project is progressing well.
DPR on Punatsangchu Phase – I is expected to be
completed in first quarter of 2006 and DPRs on two more
projects (Punatsangchu Phase – II and Mangdechu
Projects) would be initiated shortly.

Following the severe floods in Bangladesh in 2004,
Government of India has granted a flood relief assistance
of Rs.100 crores for Bangladesh. This amount would be
utilized by the Government of Bangladesh to procure food
grains, medical supplies and building material from India.
An MoU was signed between the two countries in New
Delhi in February 2005 specifying the modalities for using
this amount.

The Government of India assistance package to 9th Plan
of Bhutan was also reviewed during the visit of the King
of Bhutan in January 2005 and an additional Rs. 280 crores
towards Development subsidy was pledged.
Other important developments during the current year
include the signing of (i) an MoU on Project
Implementation Mechanism. The Project Implementation
mechanism would streamline monitoring of GOI assisted
Projects under implementation in Bhutan and also simplify
the procedures for making financial releases to the Projects
(ii) a Protocol for repayment of Government of India loan
extended to Kurichhu Project. The project, completed at
a cost of Rs. 560 crore, had a 40 percent loan component,
which is now being repaid by the Royal Government of
Bhutan.

Bhutan
As close friends and neighbours, India’s relations with
Bhutan are characterized by mutual understanding, trust,
confidence and multifaceted cooperation in a wide range
of areas for the mutual benefit of the people of the two
countries.
This relationship is sustained and enhanced by the
exchange of regular visits, including at the highest level.
During the year 2004, His Majesty King Jigme Singye
Wangchuck of Bhutan was the Chief Guest at the Republic
Day celebrations 2005. Three Memoranda of
Understanding were signed during the visit. These relate
to (i) Preparation of feasibility studies for establishment
of railway linkages between bordering towns of India and
Bhutan; (ii) Preparation of Detailed Project Reports
(DPRs) for two hydro-electric Projects in Bhutan and (iii)
Cooperation in Agriculture and allied sectors. The
delegation accompanying the King included the Crown
Prince and the Foreign Minister of Bhutan. His Majesty
the King of Bhutan had earlier visited India from 24-29
November 2004. Her Majesty Ashi Sangay Choden
Wangchuck, youngest of the four Queens of Bhutan, also
visited India from 6-21 February 2005.

To mitigate the problem of floods in both countries, a Joint
Group of Experts on Flood Management was constituted
in August 2004. The Group will assess the probable causes
and effects of the recurring floods and erosions in the
southern foothills of Bhutan and adjoining plains of India.
Two meetings of the Group have already been held.
India and Bhutan have also strengthened cooperation in
the field of security and border management in the
aftermath of the successful military action taken by the
Royal Bhutan Army in December 2003-January 2004
against Indian Insurgent Groups. An India-Bhutan Group
on Border Security and Management that was established
in March 2004 has made several practical
recommendations relating to training, exchange of
information and better cross-border coordination between
the security and administrative authorities of the two
countries, which are being implemented.

Other dignitaries from Bhutan who visited India during
the current year include Lyonpo Khandu Wangchuk,
Foreign Minister, Lyonpo Sangay Ngedup, Agriculture
Minister, Lyonpo Thinley Gyamtsho, Education Minister
and Dasho Ugen Dorji, Speaker of National Assembly.

China
India is committed to developing a long-term constructive
and cooperative partnership with China on the basis of
the principles of Panchsheel, mutual respect and
sensitivity for each other’s concerns and equality.
Cooperation between India and China is not only
conducive to their socio-economic development and
prosperity, but also to strengthening multi-polarity in the
world and enhancing the positive factors of globalisation.

From India Shri K. Natwar Singh, External Affairs
Minister and Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State
for External Affairs visited Bhutan in October 2004.
Development cooperation with Bhutan, particularly in the
hydropower sector, continued satisfactorily. The
4

India’s Neighbours

Republic Day celebrations along Rajpath in New Delhi on 26 January 2005.

His Majesty King Jigme Singye Wangchuk of Bhutan speaking at Banquet Dinner hosted in his honour by President of India. He was the
Chief Guest at the Republic Day celebrations in New Delhi on 26 January 2005. Also seen in the picture, to his right, Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh and to his left, former Prime Minister Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee.

5

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Continuity and consolidation during the year marked
India-China relations. The exchange of high level visits
and discussions imparted continuity in direction and
provided for diversification of the relationship into newer
areas of cooperation. The period saw an intensification
of exchanges at the functional levels.

settlement, held two rounds of discussions viz. in July 2004
at New Delhi and in November 2004 at Beijing. Their
discussions were frank, constructive and detailed.
A notable event during the year was the commemoration
of the 50th anniversary of Panchsheel. A number of events
were held both in New Delhi and Beijing to mark the
occasion. Chinese Peoples’ Institute of Foreign Affairs
(CPIFA) organised a commemorative seminar in Beijing
in June 2004 at which former President Shri K.R.
Narayanan was a keynote speaker. To mark the event,
both sides issued special postal covers. Subsequently, in
November 2004, the Indian Council of World Affairs
(ICWA) hosted a Panchsheel Seminar in New Delhi,
which was addressed by External Affairs Minister Shri K.
Natwar Singh and a commemorative volume on
Panchsheel was released on the occasion.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met Premier Wen
Jiabao in Vientiane, Laos in November 2004 on the
margins of the 10th ASEAN Summit. The two leaders
noted that India-China relations enjoyed a good
momentum and had wide-ranging discussions on the
nature and direction of the relationship. They highlighted
the importance of further expanding economic and trade
relations. The two leaders also reviewed the discussions
between the Special Representatives of the two countries
on the boundary question. Premier Wen Jiabao is expected
to visit India in 2005.

During the visit of Chinese State Councillor Chen Zhili,
who is in-charge of Science & Technology, Education and
Culture, she had discussions with Minister of State for
Science & Technology and Ocean Development Shri
Kapil Sibal. It was also decided to set up a Steering
Committee, at the level of Ministers, to provide overall
direction and guidance to India-China cooperation in the
area of science & technology. Education Minister Zhou
Ji, who was part of this delegation, held discussions with
the Minister of Human Resource Development. The
period saw continued exchanges between the two
countries in the area of science and technology under the
existing agreements.

External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh met
Chinese Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing on the sidelines of
international conferences, on four occasions, during which
he had discussions on bilateral relations, and regional and
international issues.
A number of high-level dignitaries from China visited
India, including Politburo Members He Guoqiang and Liu
Qi, and State Councillors Tang Jiaxuan and Chen Zhili.
From the Indian side, high level visits included those by
former President Shri K.R. Narayanan, Minister of Labour
Shri Sis Ram Ola, former National Security Adviser late
Shri J.N. Dixit and then Chief of Army Staff Gen. N.C.
Vij.

Other exchanges during the year included the visits of
Chairman of the Xinjiang province of China in October
2004 and Governor of Henan province in AugustSeptember 2004. Both the visits were under the
Distinguished Visitors’ Programme wherein important
decision/opinion makers are invited to India.

During Chinese State Councillor Tang Jiaxuan’s visit to
India in October 2004, he held substantive discussions
with the External Affairs Minister and called on the Prime
Minister. India and China reaffirmed desire to take a long
term and strategic perspective of their bilateral relations,
seize the opportunity provided by the current state of
relationship and maintain its momentum. They agreed to
continuously expand and develop further areas of
cooperation, while seeking fair, reasonable and mutually
acceptable solutions to outstanding issues, including the
boundary question. During the visit, State Councillor Tang
conveyed that China supports a bigger role for India in
the international community, including in the United
Nations Security Council.

Intensification of economic, trade, tourism and cultural
links was discussed during these visits. As part of the
programme for exchanges between Communist Party of
China (CPC’s International Liaison Department) and
Chief Ministers of India, Politburo Member Liu Qi visited
India in November 2004 at the invitation of the Chief
Minister of Delhi. The Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh
visited China from 30 January- 4 February 2005. Six Indian
political parties were represented at the third International
Conference of Asian Political Parties (ICAP) hosted by
the CPC in September 2004. Functional exchanges and
dialogue has been initiated between pairs of Indian and

The Special Representatives of India and China, who are
tasked to explore from the political perspective of the
overall bilateral relationship the framework of a boundary
6

India’s Neighbours

Chinese organisations such as Indian Institute of Public
Administration (IIPA) and Central Party School (CPS),
ICSSR and Zhejiang Provincial Academy of Social
Sciences, and Planning Commission and National
Development & Reform Commission. These exchanges
serve the purpose of not only broad basing the relationship,
but also providing forums for exchange of views including
on policies, challenges and development experiences.

companies participated. The momentum of exchange of
trade and business delegations during the year continued
to pick up.
The India-China Joint Study Group (JSG), which is tasked
to examine the potential complementarities and draw up
a programme for the development of comprehensive trade
and economic cooperation between the two countries,
continued its work and three meetings of the JSG were
held during the year. The report of the JSG, giving
recommendations to the two governments, is expected
to be completed in March 2005.

Apart from the above exchanges, the bilateral dialogue
mechanism between the two countries continued to
provide a systemic means of facilitating enhancement and
implementation of existing initiatives and identifying
newer ones. In addition to the meetings of the Special
Representatives on the Boundary Question, there were,
during the year, consultations between the Foreign
Ministries and the second round of the Policy Planning
Dialogue. The first round of Strategic Dialogue at the
level of Foreign Secretary Shri Shyam Saran and Chinese
Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei was held on 24 January
2005. The Dialogue focussed, inter alia, on issues of global
political and strategic importance.

The momentum of bilateral defence exchanges was
maintained with the visit of Chief of Army Staff (COAS)
to China from 22-29 December 2004. This was a visit by
an Indian COAS to China after ten years. The COAS
called on Chinese Vice President Zeng Qinghong and
Defence Minister Gen. Cao Guangchun, and had
extensive interaction with the Peoples’ Liberation Army
(PLA). Both the sides expressed satisfaction that peace
and tranquility is being maintained in India-China border
areas. There was also consensus on further enhancing
military exchanges and cooperation at different levels.

The year witnessed continued growth in India-China
trade. From a bilateral trade volume of US$ 338 million
in 1992, the trade volume touched US$ 7.6 billion in 2003.
For 2004, the trade volume, as per the Chinese statistics,
reached US$ 13.6 billion, an increase of 79 per cent over
2003. India’s exports to China stood at US $ 7.67 billion
(year-on-year growth of 80.4 per cent) while India’s
imports from China stood at US $ 5.93 billion (year-onyear growth of 77.2 per cent). The main exports from India
to China were iron ore, iron & steel, plastics, precious
stones (mostly diamonds), cotton yarn and organic and
inorganic chemicals. The main imports to India from
China were electrical and other machinery, organic &
inorganic chemicals, mineral fuel, silk yarn, manmade
filaments etc. Indian exports to China that have shown
rapid growth rate this year are iron ore, cotton yarn,
inorganic chemicals and machinery products. Efforts to
further promote and strengthen economic and trade
cooperation continued during the year. Promotional
activities were undertaken. The Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII) in cooperation with the Embassy of India
organised its second ‘Made in India’ show in Beijing in
December 2004 to showcase the strengths and versatility
of the Indian industry. Events were organised to promote
Indian mangoes and tea. Similarly, China was the partner
country at the India International Trade Fair held in
November 2004 in which more than 80 Chinese

Cooperation in facing non-traditional threats, particularly
against international terrorism was also discussed. PLA’s
Chief of General Staff accepted COAS’s invitation to visit
India to carry forward the cooperation between the two
militaries. COAS’s visit was an important element of the
expanding military contacts between India and China, as
part of the overall development of bilateral relations.
As part of the confidence building measures, interactions
were organised between the border personnel of the two
countries, including joint mountaineering expedition on
the Chinese side and sports event on the Indian side.
Border personnel meetings and flag meetings, which are
an important part of the confidence building measures,
were organised including during national days and
important festivals. An Air Force training delegation
visited China in March-April 2004 and another Indian
delegation visited China in September 2004 to witness
Peoples Liberation Army’s Iron Fist Exercise. From the
Chinese side, delegations from Academy of Military
Science and the National Defence University visited
India. A delegation led by Xinjiang Military Commander
visited India from 31 January to 5 February 2005.
The Chinese side provided data and information through
diplomatic channels and border flag meetings, on the
7

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

artificial lake created on Parechu river in Tibet
Autonomous Region of China as a result of landslides,
which posed a threat to downstream areas in Himachal
Pradesh. Two rounds of technical level talks were held in
Lhasa and Beijing in September and December 2004
respectively to discuss ways for a controlled removal of
the blockage before the next rainy season. Mechanism
for exchange of information on potential disaster situations
in Tibet Autonomous Region of China likely to have
downstream impact in India and further sharing of
hydrological data for some common rivers were also
discussed.

A five-member delegation led by Shri A.K. Jain,
Joint Secretary (Police) from the Ministry of Home
Affairs visited China in August 2004 for interaction
with Peoples’ Armed Police (PAP). A PAP
delegation led by Maj. Gen Wang Jianping, Deputy
Chief of Staff of CPAPF visited India in January
2005. Discussions included exploring cooperation
in training and in combating terrorism.
Central Party School (CPS) of the CPC sent a
delegation led by Prof. Li Xingshan to India in
October 2004 to study India’s agricultural economy
and social security systems. The delegation, interalia,
interacted with the Indian Institute of Public
Administration (IIPA).

Cultural exchanges under the executive programme 200305 (of the India-China Cultural Exchange Programme)
continued during the year. As part of the commemorative
activities for the 50th anniversary of Panchsheel, cultural
programmes were organised and a joint exhibition of
Indian and Chinese postage stamps held. Exchange of
students between India and China continued under the
bilateral Education Exchange Programme (EEP) signed
in June 2003. Presently, there are 22 Indian EEP scholars
in China and 21 Chinese EEP scholars in India. The
Centre for Indian Studies of Beijing University,
inaugurated during then Prime Minister Shri Vajpayee’s
visit to China in June 2003, expanded its activities
including organization of academic seminars in its own
premises and in association with other universities in
China. The first awardee of Tan Yunshan, which is given
to the best final year Hindi student of the Centre, visited
India in November 2004. Discussions continued on the
modalities for the establishment of Cultural Centres of
each country in the other.

An IIPA delegation involving 53 members of the
Advanced Professional Programme visited China in
December 2004 and had exchanges on experiences
in the field of development, administrative reform,
governance and training.
A Chinese delegation visited India in October 2004
for consultations on Climate Change prior to the
meeting of COP-10.
A seven-member delegation led by Vice Minister
Zhou Keren and members of the Foreign Affairs
Committee of the Chinese Peoples’ Political
Consultative Conference visited India from 4-11
January 2005.
A delegation led by Zhang Xiaoqiang, Vice
Chairman, National Development & Reform
Commission, (NDRC) visited India from 4-10
January 2005 to participate in the Roundtable
Conference titled “Regional Cooperation – Key to
Energy Security” organised by Ministry of Petroleum
& Natural Gas in New Delhi.

The Embassy of India, Beijing issued 15,359 visas in 2004
representing an increase of nearly 37 per cent over the
previous year. Consulate General of Shanghai issued a
total of 7,785 visas in 2004 which represents an increase
of 110 per cent over the previous year.

Mr. Cui Huilie, Senior Adviser to the Labour
Minister led a five-member delegation to India from
24-29 October 2004. The delegation held
discussions with the Indian Labour Ministry.

Functional Exchanges
Indian delegations led by Shri R.K. Singh, Joint
Secretary, Central Relief Commissioner and Shri
S.K. Chattopadhyay, Joint Secretary (Disaster
Management), MHA visited Tibet Autonomous
Region (TAR) and Beijing in September and
December 2004 respectively to discuss cooperation
in water resources including the problem as a result
of formation of an artificial lake as a result of
landslide on Parechu river.

Director General, State Administration of Cultural
Heritage (SACH) of China, Mr. Shan Jixiang, visited
India in July-August 2004 to hold discussions for a
large scale Indian exhibition in China and further
strengthen cooperation between Archaeological
Survey of India and SACH.
Vice Minister of State Council, Information Office
Mr. Wang Guoqing visited India in November 2004
8

India’s Neighbours

13-14 October 2004 to discuss with the film industry
representatives issues relating to prevention of sales of
pirated VCDs/DVDs, licencing for duplication of VCDs/
DVDs and the legislations enacted by Hong Kong
government in this regard. Minister for State for Overseas
Indian Affairs Shri Jagdish Tytler visited Hong Kong from
27-28 September 2004 in the context of the Pravasi
Bhartiya Divas.

and held discussions with Secretary (I&B) to
enhance interaction in audio-visual and print media
sector.
Vice Minister Meng Xiaosi who was part of State
Councillor Tang Jiaxuan’s delegation to India
(October 2004) held discussions with Secretary
(Culture) to further intensify cultural exchanges.
A delegation led by Dr. P. Nag, Surveyor General of
India from Department of Science & Technology
visited China in July 2004 and had meetings with
officials of the Ministry of Science & Technology
(MOST), Chinese Academy of Science (CAS),
National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NNSFC) and State Administration of Foreign
Experts’ Affairs (SAFEA). In the Joint Working
Group meeting with Ministry of Science &
Technology, 16 projects were agreed to under various
programmes covering the period 2004-06.

The third round of negotiations on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters was held in November
2004 and the two sides initialled a draft agreement. A
delegation from the Ministry of Civil Aviation visited
Hong Kong from 27-28 January 2005 for bilateral air
services consultations. The number of visas issued by
Consulate General of Hong Kong during the period
January-December 2004 was 23,719, an increase of 153
per cent over corresponding period last year.

Iran

The third Joint Working Group between Indian
Meteorological Department and China
Meteorological Administration met in New Delhi
in November 2004 to discuss further cooperation
under the MoU between the two organisations and
suggested a number of joint programmes and a work
plan for 2005-07.

India and Iran enjoy historical ties. The year 2004 saw
continued co-operation between India and Iran in the
field of energy security, transit routes in the region,
cooperation on Afghanistan and its reconstruction and
increasing bilateral trade and commercial relations, which
imparted a strategic dimension to bilateral relations.

India-China seminar on Genome Informatics in
October-November 2004 in Hang Zhou was
organised by Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology (IGIB) of CSIR and Beijing Genomics
Institute (BGI). An MoU for cooperation was signed
in August 2004 in Beijing.

High Level Political Exchanges
After the formation of the new Government in India in
May 2004, Iranian President Seyyed Mohammad Khatami
talked to Prime Minister over telephone. Foreign Minister
Dr. Kharrazi visited New Delhi on 25-26 July 2004. During
the visit, he called on Prime Minister, External Affairs
Minister and National Security Adviser. Dr. Kharrazi paid
a second visit to India in February 2005.

Bilateral technical level air services talks were held
from 25-26 January 2005 in Beijing

Hong Kong

Security and Strategic Consultations
India and Iran have both stressed upon the need for a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan free from
external interference. They have also agreed to join hands
in the reconstruction of Afghanistan. India, Iran and
Afghanistan have expressed their support to the
development of alternative access routes to Afghanistan
through the Chahbahar port of Iran via Melak-ZaranjDelaram road stretch in Afghanistan. India has
commenced the road construction project in Afghanistan
for which Iran has assured support in the form of visa
facilitation, sourcing of raw material from Iran, port and
transit facilities etc.

The period saw an expansion in the India-Hong Kong
bilateral trade. According to HKSAR statistics, Hong
Kong – India bilateral trade reached US $ 5.43 billion in
2004 (an increase of 20.3 per cent over 2003) with Indian
exports reaching US $ 3.53 billion (an increase of 24 per
cent) and Hong Kong exports reaching US $ 1.89 billion
(representing an increase of 14 per cent).
A 14-member Parliamentary delegation led by Speaker
Shri Somnath Chatterjee visited Hong Kong from 6-7
November 2004 and met prominent members of the
Indian community. Minister for Information &
Broadcasting Shri Jaipal Reddy visited Hong Kong from

Iranian Foreign Minister Dr Kharrazi and External Affairs
9

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

of ASEAN meeting on Tsunami Relief. Foreign Secretary
paid a visit to Maldives from 18-19 October 2004. During
this visit, Foreign Secretary held detailed discussion on
the bilateral relations between the two countries and other
areas of regional and international interests. Foreign
Secretary also called on President Gayoom of Maldives.

Minister remained in regular touch, including through
telephonic discussions, over the evolving situation in Iraq.
During Dr Kharrazi’s visit to India in July 2004, the two
sides reviewed progress in bilateral cooperation in different
areas and situation in Afghanistan and Iraq.
The two sides also held regular security and strategic
consultations through the established mechanisms of
interaction between their National Security Councils.
During his visit to Iran in October 2004, National Security
Adviser Late Shri J. N. Dixit held discussions on bilateral
issues and situation in Iraq and Afghanistan.

The process of economic and technical co-operation
continued on a satisfactory note. An expert team from
the National Research Laboratory for Conservation of
Cultural Property (NRLCCP), Lucknow, visited Maldives
in May 2004 to work on the conservation of
Dharumavantha Rasgefaanu Mosque.

Cooperation in the Hydrocarbons Sector
Energy security is an important area in India-Iran bilateral
relations. Following the visit of President Khatami and
signing of the MoU on cooperation in the hydrocarbons
sector, India and Iran have taken several steps to broadbase
their cooperation in this field. The two sides have
constituted a Joint Working Group (JWG) on cooperation
in hydrocarbons sector. As per the discussions held by
the JWG, India and Iran agreed to work towards longterm
purchase of LNG by India from Iran. It was also agreed
that Indian oil companies would participate in oil
exploration fields in Iran on competitive basis.

Due to public protests, which started on the 12-13 August
2004, the Government of Maldives declared a state of
national emergency in Male and its surrounding areas on
13 August 2004. The President of Maldives deputed Mr.
Ahmed Abdullah, the then Minister of Health to India
as his Special Envoy to brief the Government of India on
the developments in the Maldives. Mr. Abdullah met
External Affairs Minister on 25 July 2004 and handed
over a personal letter from President Gayoom of Maldives
addressed to the Prime Minister. The state of national
emergency was lifted on 10 October 2004.
In a significant bilateral move, Maldives opened a resident
High Commission in New Delhi and appointed Mr. Abdul
Sattar Adam as its first resident High Commissioner to
India. He presented his credentials to the President of
India on 30 November 2004.

Technical discussions between the two sides on these
aspects of cooperation are continuing. Union Minister of
Petroleum and Natural Gas Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar
visited Iran from 5-6 December 2004. He met Iranian
Petroleum Minister Dr. Bijan Zanganeh to discuss further
cooperation in this area.

Another important bilateral development was in the wake
of recent Tsunami disaster. At the request of Maldivian
Government, Indian ships, planes and helicopters with
relief material, medical teams and specialized personnel
were rushed to Maldives on 27 December 2004. Our
personnel went ashore and helped to provide essential
services, medical relief and assisted in search and rescue
operations, transporting relief materials, repairing and
restoring generators and communications. Prime Minister
informed President Gayoom that Government of India
has decided to earmark Rs. 5 crores for assisting in the
programme of relief and rehabilitation for Maldives.

India is committed to ensure a cost-effective, long term
and secure mode of transfer of Iranian gas to India. The
India-Iran Joint Committee on transfer of Iranian gas to
India is entrusted with examining all aspects of this issue.
The two sides have set up a technical sub-committee led
by GAIL and NIOC from the two sides to commission
studies on the offshore and onshore routes.

Maldives
The India-Maldives relations continued to be close and
friendly during the year 2004-2005. The warmth of these
relations was kept up through regular meetings/ exchanges
of visits.

Myanmar
India-Myanmar relations are rooted in shared historical,
cultural and religious ties. Both countries share a long
land border (over 1600 kms) and a maritime boundary in
the Bay of Bengal. Four northeastern states viz. Arunachal
Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram border

The External Affairs Minister met Mr. Fathulla Jameel,
Foreign Minister of Maldives on July 2004 at Islamabad
on the sidelines of the SAARC Council of Ministers
Meetings and in January 2005 in Jakarta on the sidelines
10

India’s Neighbours

The forecourds of Rashtrapati Bhawan where the heads of State/Government are acorded ceremonial reception on arrival.
(Photo: C.M. Bhandari)

The visiting Chairman of State Peace and Development Council of Myanmar Senior General Than Shwe being received by the President
Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam and Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh on 24 October 2004.

11

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Myanmar. A large body of population of Indian origin
(estimated at 2.5 million) lives in Myanmar. Geo-strategic
factors make it important for India and Myanmar to have
a close relationship. India-Myanmar relations are reflective
of the two countries’ common desire to cooperate with
each other in order to promote peace and tranquillity
along their border, to achieve sustained economic
development and to foster people-to-people interaction.
Recent years have seen a steady growth of exchanges,
resulting in the deepening and widening of bilateral ties.

Minister for Industry- I, U. Aung Thaung; Minister for
Railways, Shri Laloo Prasad Yadav and Myanmar’s
Minister for Rail Transportation, Major General Aung
Min, Minister of Communications and Information
Technology, Shri Dayanidhi Maran and Myanmar’s
Minister for Communications, Posts and Telegraphs,
Brig.Gen. Thein Zaw; and Minister of State (Independent
Charge) Science and Technology, Shri Kapil Sibal and
Myanmar’s Minister for S&T, U Thaung. The visit was
very successful and generated much goodwill in the
Myanmar leadership towards India.

India’s policy of constructive engagement with Myanmar
further strengthened during 2004 with exchanges at the
highest level. Senior General Than Shwe, Chairman of
the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC), paid
a State visit to India from 24-29 October 2004 at the
invitation of the President. He was accompanied by a highpowered delegation including Lt-Gen. Thein Sein,
Secretary-1 of SPDC, Lt-Gen. Thiha Thura Tin Aung
Myint Oo, Quarter Master General and Chairman,
Myanmar Economic Corporation (MEC) and eight
Cabinet Ministers including Ministers for Foreign Affairs,
Industry, Energy, Rail Transportation, Communications,
Science & Technology, Health and Religious Affairs. The
visit was historic in nature, being the first Head of State
level visit from Myanmar in 24 years and the first Head of
State - Head of Government level interaction between
the two countries in 17 years.

Other important high-level exchanges during the year
included the visit by Myanmar’s Foreign Minister U. Win
Aung to India on 24 July 2004, during which he called on
Prime Minister. In his meeting with External Affairs
Minister, the two sides discussed the Indian-MyanmarThailand trilateral highway project, enhancement of
bilateral trade to US$1 billion by 2006 and co-operation
in the energy sector. The two Ministers had earlier met
on the margins of the ASEAN Post-Ministerial
Conference/ASEAN Regional Forum meeting in Jakarta
in early July where they signed an MoU on setting up of
an Entrepreneurship Development Centre (EDC) in
Yangon. Dr. San Lwin, Associate Professor, Yangon
Institute of Economics has been selected as Director and
five Myanmar officials as trainers for the proposed EDC.
The Deputy Foreign Minister of Myanmar, U Kyaw Thu
attended the Third India-ASEAN Business Summit held
in New Delhi on 19 October and in Chennai on 20-21
October 2004.

During his visit, Senior General Than Shwe met with
President and Vice President and held wide ranging talks
with Prime Minister on bilateral, regional and global issues
of mutual interest and concern. Chairman, SPDC
categorically stated that Myanmar would not allow its
territory to be used for hostile activity against India. A
Memorandum of Understanding for Cooperation in the
field of Non-traditional Security Issues was signed between
the two countries. Both sides also expressed great interest
in furthering co-operation in the fields of infrastructure
projects and energy. An MoU on the Tamanthi
Hydroelectric Project on Chindwin River in Myanmar was
signed. The two sides also initialled a Cultural Exchange
Programme for 2004-2006. In the Joint Statement released
at the end of the visit, the Myanmar Government
expressed full support for India’s bid for permanent
membership of the UN Security Council.

Myanmar’s Minister for Rail Transportation, Maj-Gen.
Aung Min also led a 6-member delegation to India from
26 July-3 August 2004. During the visit, Myanmar and
India signed an MoU for upgrading the Yangon-Mandalay
Trunk Line. Under the MoU, Government of India has
made available a Line of Credit of US$56.36 million to
the Government of the Union of Myanmar for purchasing
rolling stock as well as upgrading workshops, tracks and
communications and signalling systems.
Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, Minister of Petroleum and
Natural Gas paid a visit to Myanmar from 11-14 January
2005 to discuss co-operation in the energy sector. During
the visit, a bilateral MoU on cooperation between India
and Myanmar in the Hydrocarbon Sector was signed. In
addition, the Petroleum Ministers of India, Myanmar and
Bangladesh agreed to explore construction of a gas
pipeline from Myanmar to India via Bangladesh.

Five bilateral meetings took place at ministerial level
between External Affairs Minister and Myanmar’s
Minister of Foreign Affairs, U. Nyan Win; Commerce and
Industry Minister, Shri Kamal Nath and Myanmar’s
12

India’s Neighbours

project on installation of tidal gauges in coastal Myanmar
fructified in April 2004. Cooperation in the fields of
communications & information technology has also
expanded. Following the first meeting of the IndiaMyanmar Joint Working Group on Communication &
Information Technology in January 2004, a Letter of
Understanding on cooperation in the Telecom Sector was
signed between Telecommunications Consultants India
Limited (TCIL) and Myanmar Posts and
Telecommunications, Government of the Union of
Myanmar on 27 July 2004 in Yangon. The EXIM Bank of
India and Foreign Trade Bank of Myanmar signed an
Agreement in October 2004 to extend a special line of
credit of US$7 million for commissioning CorDECT WLL
based basic telephone and internet networks in Yangon
and Mandalay. The project also includes installation of
an Optical Fibre Cable between the border towns of
Moreh (India) and Tamu (Myanmar). India has also
announced a grant of US$ 3 million to set up two elearning centres in Yangon and Mandalay and for
conducting an e-governance project.

Myanmar also hosted the annual Foreign Office
Consultations (FOC) between India and Myanmar on 3 5 October 2004. Shri Shyam Saran, Foreign Secretary led
the Indian delegation and U. Kyaw Thu, Deputy Foreign
Minister headed the Myanmar side. A comprehensive
review of India- Myanmar relations was carried out during
the meeting. During his visit, Foreign Secretary called on
Prime Minister H.E. Lt. Gen. Khin Nyunt as well as on
the Ministers for Home Affairs, Education and Science
& Technology. The tenth National Level Meeting between
the two countries was held simultaneously in New Delhi
from 4-7 October 2004. The delegations were led by the
respective Home Secretaries. Discussions covered security
related matters, drug trafficking, issues related to the free
movement regime, border trade and banking
arrangements.
On the economic front, India remains committed to
achieving the target set by the Joint Trade Committee of
increasing bilateral trade to US$1 billion by 2006. In fact,
bilateral trade between the two countries has expanded
significantly over the last few years. During 2003-04,
Myanmar’s exports to India amounted to US$361.38
million and its imports from India were US$108.85 million.
An Agreement on setting up of a Joint Task Force to make
recommendations for enhancing bilateral trade was also
signed between the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
and the Union of Myanmar Federation of Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (UMFCCI) in February 2004.
The Task Force’s report was released during Senior
General Than Shwe’s visit to India and its
recommendations are under consideration.

The first-ever India-ASEAN Car Rally, which was flagged
off at Guwahati on November 22 by Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh, transited through Myanmar between
24 and 28 November 2004. The Rally received extensive
coverage in Myanmar media. A ten-member high- level
delegation from Myanmar led by Lt-Gen. Ye Myint,
Member, State Peace & Development Council and
comprising Brig-Gen. Thura Aye Myint, Minister of Sports
and Maj-Gen. Tha Aye, Commander, North-West
Command went to Guwahati to participate in the flag-off
ceremony. To coincide with the Rally, a Seminar on ‘IndiaMyanmar Trade and Economic Cooperation’ was jointly
organized by Embassy of India, Yangon, Consulate General
of India, Mandalay, Union of Myanmar Federation of
Chambers of Commerce & Industry (UMFCCI) and
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in Mandalay on
25 November 2004. Shri Santosh Mohan Dev, Minister
of State for Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises
(Independent Charge), Government of India visited
Yangon and Mandalay in connection with the Seminar.
From Myanmar side, Brig-Gen. Tin Naing Thein, Minister
of Commerce addressed the Seminar.

An important plank of India’s policy has been to work
towards economic development and integration of
Northeast India with Western Myanmar by implementing
mutually beneficial cross-border projects. These include
projects in the field of roads, railways, power, science and
technology, communications and information technology.
The National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd. is
carrying out pre-feasibility study on the Tamanthi
Hydroelectric Power Project. Myanmar is also emerging
as a partner in strengthening our energy security. ONGC
Videsh Ltd. (OVL) and GAIL have acquired 20 per cent
and 10 per cent participating interest in the A-I block off
the Rakhine coast of Myanmar. OVL has also succeeded
in securing participation in the A-III Block.

As regards HRD cooperation, about 200 candidates from
Myanmar are expected to undergo training in India in
2004-05 under various programmes such as TCS of
Colombo Plan, ITEC and GCCS of ICCR. The bilateral
linkage between the Press Trust of India (PTI) and

India-Myanmar cooperation in science and technology
has also deepened and diversified during the year. A joint
13

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

anti-constitutional forces and undermine both democracy
as well as the institution of monarchy. India has always
believed that the challenges being faced by Nepal can be
addressed effectively only on the basis of national
consensus. In this context, India has called for a return
to democratic processes at the earliest. India has also
called for immediate release of all arrested political leaders,
media personnel, intellectuals and human rights activists
who should be allowed to exercise their Constitutional
rights. On its part, India will continue to support all efforts
for the restoration of political stability and economic
prosperity in Nepal.

Myanmar News Agency (MNA) has also been working
well. MNA has been regularly using news feeds from PTI,
which are published in Government dailies such as ‘The
New Light of Myanmar’ and other local language
newspapers.
On the cultural front, Indian films, particularly from
Bollywood, are extremely popular in Myanmar. After a
gap of about 20 years, Embassy of India in Yangon, in
collaboration with the Ministry of Information of the
Government of Myanmar, organized an Indian Film Week
in Yangon from 18-24 August 2004 and in Mandalay from
1-5 September 2004. The festival attracted huge crowds
and received considerable media coverage. Besides, a
Qawaali group of Nizami brothers visited Myanmar from
20-24 December 2004 and performed at various venues
including Bahadur Shah Zafar Mazaar to the delight and
appreciation of large gatherings.

Bilateral Cooperation
During the year, bilateral relations proceeded satisfactorily,
particularly in the period before dismissal of the multiparty Government and imposition of emergency in Nepal.
Nepal was the first country that External Affairs Minister
visited after assumption of charge, reflecting the priority
that India attached to further development of relations
with Nepal. The then Prime Minister of Nepal H. E. Mr.
Sher Bahadur Deuba paid a very fruitful and productive
visit to India from 8-12 September 2004. Minister of State
for External Affairs Shri Rao Inderjit Singh visited Nepal
from 29 November 1 December 2004. In addition, regular
consultations across a broad spectrum of issues were held
through existing bilateral mechanisms.

Defence co-operation has also continued on a sound
footing through the mechanism of bi-annual border liaison
meetings of the army. A series of high-level exchanges
took place during the year including the visits to Myanmar
by Lt Gen J S Verma, GOC-in-C Eastern Command from
21-24 September 2004 and by Air Chief Marshal S.
Krishnaswamy, Chairman of Chiefs of Staff Committee
and Chief of Air Staff on from 15-19 November 2004.

Nepal

A comprehensive review of bilateral issues was undertaken
during the visit of Prime Minister of Nepal to India. In
addition, several important bilateral meetings were held
including the Home Secretary-level Talks (19-20 January
2005), Joint Working Group on Border Management (1718 January 2005), Meetings of India-Nepal Bilateral
Consultative Group on Security Issues, Joint Committee
on Water Resources (7-8 October 2004), the Joint Group
of Experts Meeting on the Pancheshwar Project (6
October 2004), Secretary-level Telecommunication
Coordination Meeting 1-2 (November 2004) and Joint
Secretary-level Trade Talks (1-2 November 2004). As a
result, significant progress was achieved on several
bilateral issues.

The political and security situation in Nepal is a cause for
serious concern. On 1 February 2005, the multi-party
Government led by Prime Minister Sher Bahdur Deuba
was dissolved by the King of Nepal. An emergency has
been declared and fundamental rights suspended. Political
leaders, media personnel, intellectuals, human rights
activists and student leaders are under house arrest/
detention. There is strict censorship on both print and
electronic media.
Meanwhile, the security situation in Nepal continues to
deteriorate. The Maoists have expanded their reach and
presence throughout Nepal. They have demonstrated
their ability to disrupt life in the major towns including in
the Kathmandu valley at will. Growth of Maoist
insurgency in Nepal is a matter of serous concern to India
because of its adverse fall-out for India due to the open
and unregulated border as well as the links between
Nepal’s Maoists and the Indian Naxalite groups.

During the year, the following documents were concluded:
(i) MoU on Cooperation in the field of Weather
Forecasting; (ii) Agreement on Cooperation in the fields
of Culture and Sports; (iii) MoU between Indian Oil
Corporation and Nepal Oil Corporation for Construction
of an Oil Pipeline; (iv) Bilateral Cooperation Agreement
between Bureau of Indian Statndards and Nepal Bureau
of Standards and Metrology; and (v) Rail Services

The developments in Nepal constitute a serious setback
to the cause of democracy, which would only benefit the
14

India’s Neighbours

Agreement (facilitating commencement of rail service
between India and Nepal in July 2004).

and villages with the East West Highway, improvement
in the roads and highways on the Indian side of the border
which connect to the towns in Nepal and bringing broadgauge railway connectivity to Nepalese towns in the Terai
from the nearest points in India where broad-gauge already
exists. The Indian Consulate in Birgunj has started
functioning.

In order to streamline security related cooperation
between India and Nepal, a network of bilateral
institutional mechanisms has been evolved, comprising
Bilateral Consultative Group on Security Issues, Home
Secretary level talks and Joint Working Group on Border
Management, which have proved to be very effective in
addressing mutual security concerns. Recognising that the
growth of Maoist insurgency in Nepal is a shared security
concern, we have provided assistance as required by Nepal
to deal with it. Measures have been taken to enhance cooperation with Nepal for effective border management
and intelligence sharing. Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
personnel have been deployed along the Indo-Nepal
border with a view to ensure peace and security along the
border and prevent unfriendly elements from exploiting
the open border for cross border subversive activities.
Discussions were also concluded on bilateral Agreement
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters and an
updated Extradition Treaty which would strengthen the
institutional legal arrangements between India and Nepal
for effectively combating crime and terrorism.

Government of India offers annually more than 1000
scholarships to Nepalese students in various courses.
During the year, a new scholarship scheme, Dr. Homi J.
Bhabha Scholarship Scheme, was operationalised under
which 5 M. Tech. scholarships would be awarded to
meritorious Nepalese students every year for studying in
India. In addition, a number of Nepalese students also
come to India to study at their own expense.

Pakistan
India is committed to the establishment of peaceful,
friendly and co-operative relations with Pakistan. In
pursuance of this goal, the Government has, from time to
time, taken a number of policy initiatives. The year 200405 witnessed the commencement of a serious, sustained
and comprehensive dialogue with Pakistan. Building upon
the tremendous goodwill that was demonstrated by the
people in both countries, the Government pursued a
proactive policy of constructive engagement with Pakistan
with the objective of cementing a durable structure of
peace and stability in South Asia.

A comprehensive review of India-Nepal cooperation in
the field of water resources was undertaken in a series of
meetings of bilateral institutional mechanisms in
September-October 2004. The two sides worked out a
definitive road map to move forward on various projects.
The Joint Committee on Water Resources would also be
finalising a comprehensive strategy for flood management
and control, including measures that can be implemented
in the short to medium term.

Based on the solemn and categorical commitment given
by the President of Pakistan on 6 January 2004 not to
permit any territory under Pakistan’s control to be used
to support terrorism in any manner, the Foreign Secretaries
of the two countries met in February 2004 to commence
the Composite Dialogue. The talks signalled the unfolding
of a substantive dialogue process, including initial
interactions between Border Security Force (BSF) and
Pakistan Rangers on 24-27 March 2004 and the Narcotics
Control authorities of the two countries on 15-16 June
2004. Issues related to border management and combating
smuggling and drug trafficking were discussed, and the
two sides agreed to continue to cooperate to mutual
advantage, including through sharing of operational
intelligence.

India continued to contribute to the development efforts
of the Government of Nepal by undertaking various
development projects in the areas of infrastructure, health,
rural and community development, education, etc. During
the year, a major aid-project for laying of optical fiber cable
network along the East-West Highway was completed. A
number of small grassroot level projects in the areas of
health, education and community development were also
executed.
With a view to facilitate trade and transit and strengthen
security, Government of India has taken up several new
projects to improve border infrastructure along the IndiaNepal border. These projects include development of
border check-posts, improvement of road infrastructure
in the Nepalese Terai to strengthen connectivity of towns

Expert level meeting on Nuclear CBMs (19-20
June 2004)
During the February 2004 meeting between the Foreign
Secretaries of India and Pakistan, India suggested an
15

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

expert level dialogue on Nuclear Confidence Building
Measures (CBMs). These talks, held on 19-20 June 2004
in New Delhi, resulted in agreements on establishing a
“hotline” between the two Foreign Secretaries, upgrading,
dedicating and securing the communication link between
the DGMOs, and working towards an agreement on the
pre-notification of the flight-testing of missiles.

discussions on the subject of Economic and Commercial
Cooperation. India made wide ranging proposals on trade
promotion, transit, new trade routes, cooperation in the
fields of agriculture, petroleum and natural gas, banking,
information technology, telecommunications, postal
services, civil aviation, shipping and capital market.
On 5-6 August 2004 the Defence Secretaries of the two
countries met in New Delhi for discussions on the Siachen
issue within the framework of the Composite Dialogue.
The two sides exchanged views, and a separate meeting
was also held between the military experts to discuss
modalities for disengagement and redeployment of troops.
It was agreed to continue discussions with a view to
resolving the issue in a peaceful manner. During the talks
on Terrorism and Drug Trafficking on 10-11 August 2004
in Islamabad, both sides reaffirmed their determination
to combat terrorism and emphasized the need for complete
elimination of the menace. It was also agreed to work
towards an MoU to institutionalize cooperation between
Narcotics Control Authorities of the two countries, and
to designate nodal officials in their respective High
Commissions to liaise on drug control issues.

Foreign Secretary level talks (27-28 June 2004)
During the Foreign Secretary level talks on 27-28 June
2004 on Peace and Security and Jammu & Kashmir, views
were exchanged on carrying the process forward in an
atmosphere free from terrorism and violence. India
proposed a comprehensive framework of CBMs. It was,
inter alia, agreed to immediately restore the strength of
the respective High Commissions to the original level of
110; to immediately release all apprehended fishermen in
each other’s custody and put in place a mechanism for
the return of unintentionally transgressing fishermen and
their boats from high seas without apprehending them;
and to initiate steps for early release of civilian prisoners.
It was also agreed in principle to re-establish the
Consulates General in Karachi and Mumbai. The two
Foreign Secretaries had a detailed exchange of views on
Jammu and Kashmir and agreed to continue with a
sustained and meaningful dialogue in order to find a
peaceful,negotiated and amicable solution to the issue.

Review of the Composite Dialogue (4-6
September 2004)
External Affairs Minister met the Foreign Minister of
Pakistan on 5-6 September 2004 to review the overall
progress in the Composite Dialogue. A one-day meeting
between the two Foreign Secretaries preceded it.

The Composite Dialogue (July-August 2004)
Talks on the remaining six subjects of the Composite
Dialogue, namely, Siachen, Sir Creek, Tulbul Navigation
Project, Economic and Commercial Cooperation,
Terrorism and Drug Trafficking, and Promotion of Friendly
Exchanges in various fields, were held in the last week of
July and first half of August.

The two Ministers agreed on a series of technical talks on
various subjects, including expert level meetings on
Conventional and Nuclear CBMs, inter alia, to discuss
the draft agreement on advance notification of missile
tests; meeting between railway authorities on the
operationalisation of the Munnabao - Khokhrapar rail
link; meeting between Indian Border Security Force (BSF)
and Pakistan Rangers; meeting between Narcotics Control
Authorities, meeting between the Indian Coast Guards
and the Pakistan Maritime Security Agency to discuss an
MoU on establishing communication links between them;
and a meeting on all issues related to commencement of
a bus service between Srinagar and Muzaffarabad.

During discussions at the level of Secretaries (Culture)
on “Promotion of Friendly Exchanges in Various Fields”
in New Delhi, on 3-4 August 2004 India made wideranging proposals for promoting friendly exchanges and
cooperation in the fields of art, culture, archaeology,
education, science and technology, youth affairs and
sports, and media and tourism. Views were also exchanged
on liberalizing the visa regime and expanding the scope
of the 1974 bilateral Protocol on Visits to Religious Shrines
by increasing the number of pilgrims and shrines on both
sides. Both sides agreed to address the humanitarian issues
concerning civilian prisoners and fishermen in each other’s
custody. The Commerce Secretaries of the two countries
met in Islamabad on 11-12 August 2004 to hold

It was also agreed to establish a Committee of Experts to
consider issues related to trade; a Joint Survey of the
boundary pillars in the horizontal segment of the
international boundary in the Sir Creek area; addition of
a new category of tourist visa in the visa regime between
the two countries, and promotion of group tourism; setting
16

India’s Neighbours

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh receiving a momento from President Musharraf during their meeting in New York on 24 September
2004. External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh (to the right of PM) and Foreign Minister Kasuri (to PM's left) look on.

Foreign Secretaries of India and Pakistan, Shri Shyam Saran and Mr. Riaz Khokhar, during their meeting in New Delhi
on 4 September 2004.

17

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

up of a mechanism to deal with the issue of civilian
prisoners and fishermen to further measures for facilitation
of visits to religious shrines, and upkeep of historical sites;
implementation of the outcome of the August 2004
meeting of Defence Secretaries; and enhanced interaction
and exchanges among the respective Foreign Offices.

Survey of the Boundary pillars in the Horizontal
segment of the International Boundary in the Sir
Creek area was held on 14-15 December 2004 in
Islamabad. The two sides agreed to commence the
Joint Survey of the Boundary Pillars from 3 January
2004. The survey took note of the existing pillars.
A joint computation of the coordinates of these
pillars was carried out from 8-12 February 2005 and
the joint report would be submitted to the respective
governments.

Technical level talks (December 2004)
Technical level talks on various subjects, as agreed during
the meeting between the two Foreign Ministers in
September 2004 were held in the first half of December.

Separate meetings on Nuclear and Conventional
CBMs were held on 14-15 December 2004 in
Islamabad. The two sides discussed various proposals
in these fields. Understandings were reached on
upgrading the link between DGMOs, and
establishing hotline between the two Foreign
Secretaries.

These included the following:
A technical level meeting between the railway
authorities of the two countries was held at
Islamabad on 2-3 December 2004 to discuss the
operationalisation of a rail link between Munnabao
and Khokrapar. Both sides agreed to an early
establishment of the proposed link. It was also agreed
by the two sides to continue with discussions and to
initiate necessary steps in the interim, to undertake
specific activities including laying of railway tracks
and other related infrastructure required to
operationalise the rail link.

Further, the technical level meetings on various
subjects are expected to be held between January
and June 2005. The meeting of the Joint Study
Group on trade matters headed by Commerce
Secretaries has taken place on 22-23 February 2005.
New Round of the Composite Dialogue
The Foreign Secretaries of the two countries met in
Islamabad on 27-28 December 2004 to initiate the next
round of the Composite Dialogue. They had discussions
on the overall progress in bilateral relations, and on Peace
and Security including CBM, and Jammu and Kashmir.
A schedule of meetings on the other six subjects in the
Composite Dialogue was worked out. On the issue of Peace
and Security including CBMs, building upon the existing
contacts between DGMOs, the two Foreign Secretaries
agreed to promote regular contacts at local level at
designated places and explore further CBMs along the
international boundary and the LoC. On Jammu and
Kashmir, India suggested five places along the
International Boundary and the LOC where members of
the divided families from the two sides could come and
meet under a joint security arrangement.

On 3-4 December 2004 the two sides had a
preliminary exchange of views on the MoU for the
establishment of a communication link between the
Indian Coast Guards and the Pakistan Maritime
Security Agency. It was agreed to continue with the
discussions.
The first meeting between India and Pakistan on all
issues related to the commencement of the bus
service between Srinagar and Muzaffarabad was held
in New Delhi on 7-8 December 2004. Both sides
reiterated their commitment towards an early
establishment of the proposed link and exchanged
ideas on all aspects related to its operationalisation.
The two sides agreed to meet again to continue the
discussions.
The Narcotics Control Authorities of India and
Pakistan met on 13-14 December 2004 in New
Delhi. The two sides positively engaged with each
other on issues related to drug trafficking, and on
enhancing bilateral cooperation through exchange
of information and operational intelligence. MoU
on drug related matter was also exchanged between
the two sides.

High-level Political Contacts
The process of engagement with Pakistan has been taken
forward through high-level political contacts and visits.
External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh had several
interactions with the Foreign Minister of Pakistan. During
his visit to Islamabad on 19 - 23 July 2004 for the SAARC
Ministerial Council Meeting, he held discussions with his
Pakistani counterpart, and called on the President and

A technical level meeting on carrying out the Joint
18

India’s Neighbours

the Prime Minister of Pakistan. Earlier, the two Foreign
Ministers met in Qingdao on 21 June 2004 and in Jakarta
on 2 July 2004 during the course of multilateral events.

people-to -people exchanges, including among
Parliamentarians, journalists, jurists, sportspersons,
artistes, businessmen, etc. The Speaker of the Pakistan
National Assembly led a Parliamentary delegation to India
from 18-23 December 2004 at the invitation of Speaker,
Lok Sabha, and the Chief Election Commissioner of
Pakistan visited India at the invitation of his Indian
counterpart from 29 November to 5 December 2004.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met President Pervez
Musharraf in New York on 24 September 2004. It was the
first meeting at the highest level after the formation of
the new Government in India. Prime Minister emphasised
that the dialogue process was based on President
Musharraf’s assurance on terrorism as contained in the
Joint Press Statement of 6 January 2004.

In order to further facilitate people-to-people contact and
to provide a fillip to the present process in India-Pakistan
relations, the Government, on 18 September 2004,
announced unilateral measures to liberalize visa regime
for Pakistan nationals, including accredited journalists
with minimum 3 years accreditation with national or
international media of repute; academicians and
professors, Vice Chancellors and those coming on the
invitation of reputed/eminent universities and institutions;
medical doctors, if accompanying patients for treatment
at leading/reputed hospitals in India; all Pakistan nationals
above the age of 65 years. It was also decided to grant
permission to Pakistan nationals to visit upto twelve places
during each visit, and to liberalize the issue of visas for
participation in conferences.

The two leaders reiterated their commitment to continue
the bilateral dialogue to restore normalcy and cooperation,
and also agreed to look at the possibility of a gas pipeline
in the larger context of expanding trade and economic
relations between the two countries. On J&K, PM
conveyed India’s willingness to explore all options, short
of redrawing of boundaries, or a second partition of the
country.
The visit of the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Shaukat
Aziz, on 23-24 November 2004 in his capacity as the
Chairperson of SAARC facilitated further forward
movement in bilateral relations. Although SAARC was
the occasion for the visit, there was also an exchange of
views on bilateral issues. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh underlined the importance of Pakistan fulfilling, in
letter and spirit, its commitment on cross-border terrorism.
He also reiterated India’s determination to address all
issues on the bilateral agenda, in a serious and purposeful
manner.

In December 2004, the Government took the unilateral
decision to grant visas to senior citizens (above 65 years),
children (below 12 years), and members of pre-vetted
groups from Pakistan on arrival at Wagah Border. In
addition, the Government also decided to allow admission
to students from Pakistan in technical institutions in India,
on a case-by-case basis.

As agreed during the Foreign Secretary level talks during
27-28 December 2004 in Islamabad, the contacts at
political level have continued. External Affairs Minister
Shri K. Natwar Singh visited Pakistan from 15-17 February
2005 where an agreement to start the SrinagarMuzaffarabad bus service from 7 April 2005 and to start a
bus service from Amritsar to Lahore and religious places
such as Nankana Sahib was reached. It was agreed to
initiate discussions on reducing risks of nuclear accidents
or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons and preventing
incidents at sea and to look at a gas pipeline through
Pakistan subject to satisfaction of India’s security concerns
and assured supplies.

Exchange of visits by pilgrim groups
The year witnessed a number of visits by pilgrims groups
on both sides. This included the visits by Indian pilgrim
groups on the occasion of Martyrdom of Guru Arjan Dev
in June, Barsi of Maharaja Ranjit Singh in June, birth
anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev in November, and
Katasraj and Hayat Pitafi in November 2004. Similarly,
groups of Pakistani pilgrims undertook visits to Kalyar
Sharief, Ajmer Sharif, and Sirhind Sharif in India.
In addition, India allowed Pakistani pilgrims to visit places
outside the bilateral protocol of 1974, including 400
pilgrims to Khandoor Sahib in April 2004, 1000 pilgrims
to Golden Temple at Amritsar in August - September 2004
for “Prakash Utsav”; 12 pilgrims from Pakistan to Charare-Sharief in J&K from 26-31 October 2004; 250 pilgrims
to Fatehgarh Sahib in December 2004 for 300th ‘Shahidi

People to people exchanges- Visa liberalisation
measures
The overwhelming desire of the people for peaceful and
normal interaction found expression in the increased
19

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

A mechanism would be introduced for early
repatriation, without sentencing of inadvertent
crossers;

Divas’; and a visit of a 2000 strong group from Ahmediya
community to Qadian (Punjab) on 26-28 December 2004.
In keeping with the desire of the people, India made a
number of proposals to Pakistan for addition of new shrines
to the 1974 Protocol on Visits to Religious Shrines, and
to increase the size of pilgrim groups visiting on various
occasions as well as sending additional groups on occasions
outside the Protocol. It was also proposed to start a bus
service between Amritsar and religious places in and
around Lahore. The two sides agreed to allow visits by
pilgrim groups to Gurudwara Darbar Sahib (at Kartarpur)
and Dera Baba Bhuman Shah Shrine at Okara in Pakistan,
Shadani Darbar at Raipur (Madhya Pradesh) and Shrine
of Hazrat Boo Ali Shah Qalandar (at Panipat, Haryana)
in India.

A similar mechanism would be established for early
release, without sentencing of those under 16
apprehended by either side.
Status of Cross Border Terrorism
The ceasefire of 25 November 2003 along the International
Boundary, Line of Control and the Actual Ground Position
Line (AGPL), continues to hold. While there has been
some decline in the level of infiltration in the recent past,
Pakistan has so far not taken any significant action to
dismantle the infrastructure of support to terrorism, such
as communications links, launching pads, and training
camps. The Government is monitoring the situation
closely and continues to emphasize upon Pakistan the
criticality of the fulfilment of its commitment on terrorism.

Issues related to Civilian Prisoners and
Fishermen
The humanitarian issues related to prisoners and
fishermen are high on the agenda of the Government.
The issue of early release and repatriation of about 900
Indian civilian prisoners, 54 Prisoners of War, and 974
fishermen, presently in Pakistan’s custody, was taken up
consistently with Pakistan at all levels. The matter was
also raised during the visit of the Prime Minister of
Pakistan to New Delhi in November. As a result of
continuous efforts, Pakistan released 266 Indian fishermen
on 6 January 2005. Pakistan has on 17 January 2005
provided consular access for 40 civilian prisoners and six
fishermen who were imprisoned in Quetta, Gwadar and
Mach Jails. Pakistan provided consular access to another
701 fishermen and 9 civilian prisoners from 8-12 February
2005 and has indicated that it would be providing consular
access to all fishermen in its custody in February 2005.
India provided consular access to 135 Pakistani civilian
prisoners and released as many as 58. Besides, 108
Pakistani fishermen (out of a total of 140) were provided
consular access.

Relations have been restored at the level of High
Commissioners, transport and communication links have
resumed, a series of technical level and Composite
Dialogue related meetings have been held on schedule,
and people to people contact has been sustained and has
given further energy to the process. The two Foreign
Secretaries have already chalked out a calendar of
meetings for the year 2005. The Government intends to
continue with the present process of building confidence,
enhancing cooperation and dialogue in an atmosphere
free from terror and violence.

Sri Lanka
The current year saw further consolidation in India-Sri
Lanka relations with high-level visits, expansion of trade,
increased Indian investments in Sri Lanka, and
augmentation of defense linkages. The President, Prime
Minister, Leader of Opposition and Foreign Minister of
Sri Lanka all visited India during this period in order to
exchange views on bilateral issues and other areas of
mutual interest and to work towards further intensification
of bilateral relations. The close political understanding
between the two countries and the importance accorded
to bilateral relations is reflected by the endorsement of
India’s candidature for a permanent seat in the UN
Security Council.

During the Foreign Secretary level talks in December
2004, it was inter-alia agreed that:
Immediate notification would be provided to the
respective High Commissions through the Foreign
Ministries of arrested Pakistani/Indian nationals;
Consular access would be provided within three
months of apprehension;

Parliamentary elections were held in Sri Lanka in April
2004 and a new government under the leadership of Prime
Minister Mahinda Rajapaksa assumed office. Prime
Minister Rajapaksa chose India as the first destination of

Repatriation would be done immediately after
completion of sentence and nationality verification;
20

India’s Neighbours

his visit abroad in July 2004. Sri Lankan Foreign Minister
Lakshman Kadirgamar had earlier visited India on 28-29
April 2004. President Chandrika Bandaranaike
Kumaratunga visited India from 4-7 November 2004 and
Leader of Opposition Ranil Wickremesinghe was in India
from 11-14 October 2004.

of licensed fishing, cooperation in enhanced surveillance
to minimize the problems of incursions of trawlers from
both sides and cooperation in preservation of ecology and
conservation of marine fisheries in the Palk Straits.
A large number of Sri Lankan soldiers, sailors and airmen
are being trained in Indian defense establishments. About
2100 slots in various defense institutions in India are
expected to be utilized by Sri Lankan armed forces
personnel in the current year. A bilateral Defense
Cooperation Agreement and the memorandum of
understanding on the Rehabilitation of the Airfield in
Palaly are under consideration.

The Sri Lankan leaders also briefed India on developments
in the peace process in Sri Lanka. India reiterated its
support for the process of seeking a comprehensive,
negotiated settlement acceptable to all communities of
Sri Lanka, which should reflect the pluralistic nature of
Sri Lankan society, within the framework of a united Sri
Lanka and consistent with democracy and respect for
individual rights. India maintains an abiding interest in
the security of Sri Lanka and remains committed to its
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. India favours
the early resumption of negotiations pertaining to the
peace process. Any interim arrangement on
administration should be an integral part of an enduring
final settlement that maintains the unity and territorial
integrity of Sri Lanka and ensures the safety, well-being
and prosperity of the people.

Bilateral economic ties saw further intensification during
this period. In addition to expansion of trade and an
increase in investments, efforts were made to deepen and
widen the framework of trade by upgrading the Free Trade
Agreement into a Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Agreement by including trade in services and investments.
Two rounds of talks at the level of Commerce Secretary
on the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
were held in August 2004 and February 2005.
India is today the fourth largest foreign direct investor in
Sri Lanka (after Singapore, UK and Australia). Although
historical inflows have been low, there has been an rapid
increase after the Free Trade Agreement became
operational. A major attraction for Indian investors has
been the ability to re-export to India while benefiting from
lower tariffs on raw materials in Sri Lanka. Belying the
erstwhile trend, India was the biggest FDI investor in Sri
Lanka in 2002 and 2003.

The Sri Lanka peace process is currently stalled. The LTTE
withheld participation in the peace process from April
2003. Subsequently, it proposed creation of an Interim
Self-Governing Authority (IGSA) for the Northern and
Eastern areas, which is clearly outside the present
constitution of Sri Lanka. The LTTE, on its part, is refusing
to state unambiguously that it is committed to a unified
Sri Lanka. A new dimension to the peace process was
added in 2004 as a result of rebellion by LTTE’s prominent
eastern military commander Karuna, which added to the
bloody internecine conflict and assassinations.

Sri Lanka Board of Investment as of August 2004 had
given approvals to 147 projects with total FDI of US$
450 million. Figures of actual inflows are not available
but it is estimated that 50 per cent of Indian investment
in SAARC countries is in Sri Lanka. A major power
project involving setting-up of a 300 MW coal or LNG
driven power plant by the National Thermal Power
Corporation and Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd is under
consideration.

The existing understandings between India and Sri Lanka
on the humane treatment and early release of fishermen
who stray across maritime boundary lines continued to
be implemented. It has been decided to constitute a Joint
Working Group to deal with this issue. The Joint Working
Group would meet frequently to deal with issues relating
to straying fishermen, work out modalities for prevention
of use of force against them and the early release of
confiscated boats, and explore possibilities of working
towards bilateral arrangements for licensed fishing. A
memorandum of understanding on fisheries that will
institutionalize cooperation in the fisheries sector between
the two countries is also under consideration. Some of
the salient features of this memorandum are consideration

The Government of India has extended a number of credit
lines to Sri Lanka. Two of them are currently operational.
These are a US $100 million line of credit for capital goods,
consumer durables, consultancy services and food items
and a US $31 million line of credit for supply of 300,000
tonnes of wheat to Sri Lanka. In addition a US $150
million line of credit has been offered to the Sri Lankan
21

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

government for purchase of petroleum products as has
been another US $100 million line of credit for rural
infrastructure projects. Thus a total of about US $381
million (approx. Rs 1700 crores) is being made available
to Sri Lankan Government through lines of credit.

1500 cataract operations and rural development projects.
Following the devastating tsunami on 26 December 2004,
on the request of Sri Lankan Government, massive Indian
relief operation involving naval ships and helicopters got
underway in Sri Lanka. The Indian naval ships with
medical teams, aircrafts, vessels provided immediate
assistance in search, rescue, transport, damage assessment
operations, salvage and debris clearance in the harbours
of Galle, Trincomalee and other areas. The fact that Indian
relief was the first to arrive has been acknowledged by
President Kumaratunga and Foreign Minister Kadirgamar
among others.

The Government of India is in the process of executing
development projects in Sri Lanka worth about Rs 70
crores and has made additional commitments worth
approximately US$ 87 million. The projects that are being
implemented or are being considered include the
construction of a general hospital, grant towards
construction of a Cancer Hospital, projects to strengthen
educational and vocational training systems, conduct of

22

South East Asia and the Pacific

B

uilding on tremendous historical and cultural linkages
with the South-east Asia region, India continued to pursue
closer relations with South East Asia as envisioned in its
Look East Policy. India’s Look East Policy has been
extended to Phase II, beyond South East Asia to the
Pacific region. Regular exchange of high level visits at
bilateral level and interactions at regional and multilateral
fora have contributed to a higher degree of comfort and
familiarity among the leaders, which in turn helped in
imparting fresh dynamism in India’s relations with these
countries. The high point in India’s contacts with the
region was the visit of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh to Vientiane, Lao PDR to attend the third IndiaASEAN Summit from 29-30 November 2004. From the
other end, Prime Minister of Singapore Mr. Goh Chok
Tong was the first Head of Government to be received by
the UPA government. The Prime Ministers of New
Zealand and Malaysia visited India during the year. Visit
of New Zealand Prime Minister took place after nearly
two decades and visit of Malaysian Prime Minister was of
the longest duration as compared to his visits to other
countries. On the margins of third India-ASEAN Summit,
Prime Minister had bilateral meetings with President of
Indonesia H.E. Mr. Sushilo Bambang Yudhoyono, Prime
Minister of Australia H.E. John Howard and Prime
Minister H.E. Mr. Lee Hsien Loong of Singapore. The
Foreign Ministers of India and ASEAN met for the first
time before the summit. At the Summit, “India-ASEAN
Partnership for Peace, Progress and Shared Prosperity”
was signed. External Affairs Minister attended a Special
ASEAN Leaders’ Summit in the aftermath of the
Earthquake and Tsunami hosted by the Indonesian
President in Jakarta on 6 January 2005. Third India –
ASEAN Business Summit was held in New Delhi on 19
October and in Chennai on 20-21 October 2004 witnessed
impressive participation from all the ASEAN countries.
India-ASEAN car rally was flagged by Prime Minister at
Guwahati on 22 November 2004 and by ASEAN leaders
at Vientiane on 29 November 2004.The year saw fresh
contacts with the leadership of South East Asian
countries, which witnessed change of power i.e. Indonesia,

2

Malaysia and Singapore. A number of ministerial visits
that took place during this period also helped in further
consolidation of India’s relations with the region.
As far as the pacific region is concerned, India participated
for the second time in the Post Forum Dialogue meetings
with the PIF, in Samoa in August 2004. India reiterated
its intention to assist in the development of the Pacific
Island economies through economic and technical
cooperation. India’s bilateral relations with countries of
this region saw further consolidation and growth. India
continues to attach due importance to countries of South
East Asia and Pacific region as envisioned in our “Look
East Policy” I & II”.

Australia
India-Australia bilateral relations continued to develop
and grow into a strong partnership. The Coalition victory
in the Federal Parliament and return of Prime Minister
John Howard of Australia ensured continuity and added
strength to the efforts made in enhancing the bilateral
relations between India and Australia.
Exchange of Ministerial visits from India to Australia and
from Australia to India continued during this period. Shri
P.M. Sayeed, Minister for Power, visited Australia from 6
to 10 September 2004 to participate in the 19th World
Energy Congress held at Sydney. Shri Jagdish Tytler,
Minister (Independent Charge) for Overseas Indian
Affairs visited Australia from 26 October to 1 November
2004 to meet the Indian community in Australia and also
to promote the 3rd Pravasi Bharatiya Divas held in
Mumbai in January 2005. A delegation of Members of
Parliament, which included Smt. Pratibha Singh, MP;
Smt. Krishna Tirath, MP; Smt. Jayaben Thakkar, MP; and
Dr.(Smt.) Chandrakala Pandey, MP visited Canberra to
attend the 2nd Asian Women Parliamentarians’ and
Ministers’ Conference on 29-30 June 2004. Election
Commissioner Shri B.B. Tandon visited Australia from 310 October 2004 to observe the Australian federal
elections. From Australia, the Premier of Queensland, Mr.
Peter Beattie, visited India in September with a business
23

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Governments of India and Brunei Darussalam. Pehin Haji
Awang Mohd Ali, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Brunei, led a delegation of four members to attend the
Third India-ASEAN Business Summit held in New Delhi
on 19 October and in Chennai on 20-21 October 2004.

delegation. The Trade Office of the Queensland
Government was inaugurated by him in Bangalore during
his visit. The Premier of South Australia, Mr. Mike Rann,
visited India with a business delegation in October. Ms.
Martha Thompson, Minister for Information and
Communication Technology and Small Business of the
State Government of Victoria, visited India in October.
The Premier of New South Wales, Mr. Bob Carr, visited
India in November with a large business delegation. IndiaAustralia trade relations continued to grow during the
year. The visits of the Premiers of Queensland, New South
Wales and South Australia to India with large business
delegations focused on promoting trade and economic
relations between India and Australia. The State Bank of
India’s branch office was inaugurated on 21 April 2004.
Indian companies’ investment in Australia increased
during the year. Deepak Fertilizers and Petrochemicals
Corporation Ltd. started a joint venture and ONGC
Videsh Ltd. was awarded a prospective block for oil and
gas exploration in Western Australia. Prominent
Australian banks launched special investment funds for
India. In the field of agriculture, an important
breakthrough was made by starting annual consultations
on plant quarantine issues which would promote import
and export of agricultural products between the two
countries.

Three teams consisting of 4 members each took part in
the First India-ASEAN Motor Car Rally 2004 from
Guwahati to Batam (Indonesia).

Cambodia
Bilateral relations between India and Cambodia continued
to grow and diversify during the year 2004-05. Shri R.M.
Abhyankar, Secretary (ANA) visited Cambodia on 6 May
2004 and called on the Foreign Minister for bilateral
discussions.
In part utilization of the Government of India credit line
of US$10 million, Indian companies supplied 240
irrigation pumps worth about US$5 million to the
Cambodian Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology.
The balance is to be used for West Barai Irrigation Project.
Shri D. Datta, Chairman & Managing Director, WAPCOS
(India) Ltd. visited Cambodia from 17-19 November 2004
for discussions with Cambodian authorities, regarding
modalities for implementation phase of the Project.
Ms. Ranjana Gauhar, an internationally acclaimed Odissi
dancer, visited Cambodia from 16-27 April 2004 with a
5-member group for filming a documentary “Nectar in
Stone”, sponsored by XP Division, MEA. Ms. Gauhar
called on the Cambodian Minister of Culture and Fine
Arts, H.R.H. Princess Norodom Buppha Devi. As part of
the filming, she gave a dance performance in front of the
famous Angkor Wat Temple along with a Cambodian
Apsara dancer. The Indian Embassy in collaboration with
the Cambodian Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts,
organized a music and dance programme on 19 April 2004
comprising Odissi dance by Ms. Gauhar, and dance
programme by Cambodian artistes.

Cooperation in the field of Defence continued to be active
during the year. Australian Navy, Army and the Air Force
Chiefs visited India during the year. Naval ships visit was
another aspect of growing cooperation between the two
defence services.

Brunei Darussalam
Bilateral relations with Brunei Darussalam continued to
be cordial and friendly. Important areas of interactions
were political, commercial, science and technology and
sports issues.
Dr. Sheel Kant Sharma, Additional Secretary (IO) in the
Ministry visited Brunei from 5-7 May 2004 as the Special
Envoy of the External Affairs Minister and held an
audience with Prince Mohamed Bolkiah, Foreign Minister
of Brunei on 6 May 2004 on ARF related issues. A team
of four scientists from the Indian Space Research
Organization successfully monitored the launching of the
Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) from
its TTC Centre in Brunei Darussalam on 20 September
2004. The Centre was set up under an agreement signed
in August 1997 in the space field between the

Under the Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI)
Programme, the Government of India has decided to set
up the Cambodia-India Enterpreneurship Development
Centre (CIEDC) in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. A delegation
led by Dr. Dinesh Awasthi, Director of the
Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India (EDII),
Ahmedabad, visited Phnom Penh from 7-11 June 2004
to conduct Entrepreneurship Appreciation Workshop and
selection of Director/Trainers and other key officials for
the CIEDC.
24

South East Asia and the Pacific

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh with the President of Afghanistan Mr. Hamid Karzai in New Delhi on 24 February 2005.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh meets the Prime Minister of
Australia Mr. John Howard on the
sidelines of ASEAN Summit
in Vientiane, Laos
on 29 November 2004.

25

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

A team of two professors from the Central Institute of
English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad, visited Phnom
Penh for the Basic English Language and Communications
Skills Course for the Officials of the Government of
Cambodia from 28 June to 23 July 2004. This was an IndiaSingapore joint effort under the ‘Initiative for ASEAN
Integration’ (IAI) programme.

4-7 December 2004. The Rally received ceremonial
welcome and send-off by the Cambodian dignitaries. The
highlight of the Rally’s programme in Cambodia was the
India-ASEAN Tourism Evening followed by dinner,
organized by the Cambodian Ministry of Tourism. The
function was presided over by H.R.H. Prince Norodom
Ranariddh, President of the National Assembly and
addressed by H.E. Mr Tea Banh, Deputy Prime Minister
and Co-Minister of National Defence and H.E. Mr. Lay
Prohas, Minister of Tourism. The participants of the Rally
were treated to an extravagant cultural show, which
included several dances choreographed by H.R.H Princess
Buppha Devi.

During his visit to Cambodia in November 2002, the Prime
Minister had announced providing seed money of US$1
million for setting up a Museum of Traditional Asian
Textiles at Siem Reap under the Mekong-Ganga
Cooperation (MGC) Programme. Cambodian government
has allotted a 1-acre plot for the Museum at a prime
location in Siem Reap. The project is being coordinated
by APSARA Authority of Cambodia and the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR).

H.E. Dr. Thong Khon, Secretary of State, Ministry of
Tourism visited India from 20-23 November 2004 to
participate in the inauguration ceremonies for the IndoASEAN Car Rally at Guwahati on 22 November 2004.

The Prime Minister, during his visit to Cambodia in April
2002, announced gifting of 5 MIE IT Kiosks to Cambodia.
During the year 2004, NIIT Ltd. established five kiosks
in Phnom Penh, Siem Reap, Takeo, and Kandal. These
are running satisfactorily and have evoked positive
response in the schools and the public.

Khmer version of Ramayana by C.Rajagopalachari
(translated into Khmer by Dr. Thon Hin) was released in
Phnom Penh on 16 December 2004 by H.R.H. Samdech
Norodom Sirivudh, Deputy Prime Minister and CoMinister of Interior, Royal Government of Cambodia. Shri
C, Babu Rajeev, Additional Secretary & Director General,
Archeological Survey of India (ASI) visited Cambodia
from 15-18 December 2004 to participate in the
UNESCO-ICC Plenary Session and for discussions
regarding ASI’s Ta Prohm Restoration Project at Siem
Reap.

A Cambodian delegation led by Mr. Lay Prohas, Minister
of Tourism, visited India to attend the Third IndiaASEAN Business Summit from 19-21 October 2004. A
three-member Indian delegation visited Cambodia from
26-29 October 2004 to attend the First ARF InterSessional Support Group on Confidence Building
Measures.

Fiji

Shri L.L.Mehrotra, Vice-President of the Indian Institute
of Advanced Studies, Simla and former Secretary in the
Ministry of External Affairs & Special Envoy of the UNSG
to Cambodia, visited Cambodia from 14-18 November
2004 to participate in the 7th Socio-Cultural Research
Congress on Cambodia at the Royal University of Phnom
Penh and delivered a lecture on ‘United Nations’
Contribution to Peace, Democracy and Stability in
Cambodia’. He called on His Majesty Samdech Norodom
Sihanouk, Father-King of Cambodia; H.E. Mr. Chea Sim,
President of the Senate; H.E. Mr. Heng Samrin, Ist VicePresident of the National Assembly; H.E. Mr. Sar Kheng
& H.R.H. Prince Norodom Sirivudh, Deputy Prime
Ministers and Co-Ministers of Interior; H.E. Mr. Sok An,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister-in-Charge of the
Council of Ministers and H.E. Mr. Hor Namhong, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and
International Co-operation.

Indo-Fijian bilateral relations have grown steadily as a
result of several on going initiatives and high level visits.
The GOI sent a Sugar Technology Mission to assist in
restructuring Fiji’s ailing sugar industry and is considering
a line of credit at favorable terms to Fiji Sugar Corporation
to outsource machinery/services from India for the
modernization of 4 sugar mills. 34 Fijian nominees have
been deputed for academic/specialised training
programmes under various scholarship schemes of the
Government of India. The assistance rendered by India is
being widely acknowledged. The Government of India
has reopened its Cultural Center in Suva alongwith a sub
center in Lautaka. The Cultural centers in Fiji will act as
regional centers for promoting cultural goodwill and
understanding in the region. India has decided to depute
three artists for a period of one year to this Cultural Center.
Several high level visits took place between India and Fiji
after a gap of several years, which led to a better

The 1st India-ASEAN Car Rally crossed Cambodia from
26

South East Asia and the Pacific

understanding between the two countries. Visits from
India included a 2-member Parliamentary delegation to
attend a Commonwealth Ministerial meeting on Women’s
affairs in May, visit of a 6-member Parliamentary
delegation to attend Asia-Pacific Parliamentarians
Conference on Environment and Development in August
and the visit of Minister of State (Independent Charge)
for Overseas Indian Affairs in November to promote PBD
2005.

July 2004. During his bilateral meeting with his Indonesian
counterpart Dr. N. Hassan Wirajuda on the sidelines of
the ARF on 2 July 2004, bilateral relations were
comprehensively reviewed. External Affairs Minister
invited the Indonesian Foreign Minister to pay a visit to
New Delhi for the next meeting of the bilateral Joint
Commission, which is expected to be held in early 2005.
In the aftermath of the unprecedented Tsunami natural
disaster on 26 December 2004 which devastated coastal
areas of northern Sumatra, President, Vice President,
Prime Minister, Speaker of the Lok Sabha and External
Affairs Minister addressed messages of sympathy to their
counterparts in Indonesia. As part of its region-wide
assistance to neighbours struck by the Tsunami, India
provided US$ 1 million worth of emergency relief supplies
to Indonesia. Two Indian Naval ships, INS Nirupak and
INS Khukri, were deployed off the coast of western Aceh
which was completely devastated by the Tsunami. Medical
teams from INS Nirupak treated victims of the disaster
both on-board and at an on-shore camp for three weeks,
while INS Khukri disembarked and distributed 35 tonnes
of emergency relief supplies. The Indian relief mission was
fully coordinated with the Indonesian authorities and
military (TNI).

A 7-member Fijian ITC Partnership Development Mission
visited India in August to obtain technical assistance for
the development of IT industry. Commander of the Fiji
Armed Forces visited India in September to attend Pacific
Armies Management Seminar.

Indonesia
India’s relations with Indonesia, the largest country in
South-east Asia and a strategically important neighbour
with which we share a maritime boundary, continued to
broaden and intensify during the year. These relations are
underpinned by India’s shared values as Asia’s largest
pluralistic democracies, with a mutual stake in each other’s
success and prosperity.
As in India, 2004 was an election year in Indonesia. Well
organized and peaceful Parliamentary and Presidential
elections were held in Indonesia from April-September
2004, marking a major step forward in the consolidation
of Indonesia’s transition to democracy. As a long-standing
democracy, India welcomed the smooth democratic
transition to a new leadership in Indonesia. Both President
and Prime Minister facilitated H.E. Dr. Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono, who assumed the office of the President of
Indonesia on 20 October 2004 and expressed the desire
to foster even closer relations with Indonesia based on
our common values and challenges.

External Affairs Minister attended a Special ASEAN
Leaders’ Summit on the Aftermath of the Earthquake and
Tsunami hosted by the Indonesian President in Jakarta
on 6 January 2005. He outlined the well coordinated and
intensive relief efforts undertaken in the disaster struck
areas of India as well as our commitment to assist our
neighbours, including Indonesia, with disaster relief.
External Affairs Minister called on the Indonesian
President on 7 January 2005. President Yudhoyono
conveyed appreciation for India’s prompt disaster relief
assistance and reiterated his commitment to building
multi-sectoral ties with India.

The tradition of annual summit level interaction
established in 2000 was maintained, with Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh and Indonesian President Dr. Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono meeting in Vientiane on the margins
of the Third India-ASEAN Summit on 28 November
2004. India’s relations with ASEAN have progressed
steadily during Indonesia’s Chairmanship of this regional
grouping in 2003-04, culminating in the signing of an
ASEAN-India Partnership for Peace, Progress and Shared
Prosperity document on 30 November 2004.

A bilateral MoU on Cooperation to Combat International
Terrorism was concluded with Indonesia on 2 July 2004.
The JWG established under this MoU will report to the
bilateral Joint Commission. Minister of Commerce and
Industry Shri Kamal Nath attended the Third IndiaASEAN Economic Consultation Meeting held in Jakarta
on 5 September 2004. During the bilateral meeting with
his Indonesian counterpart, both sides agreed to work
closely to give further impetus to bilateral trade, economic
and investment relations.

External Affairs Minister attended the ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF) meeting held in Jakarta from 30 June to 2

An Indonesian Business delegation attended the Third
27

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

India-ASEAN Business Summit held in Delhi/Chennai
from 19-21 October 2004. Sectoral and functional
cooperation between India and Indonesia in the areas of
defence, science and technology, technical cooperation
and culture were significantly enhanced during the year.

of JNICC and broaden our cultural interaction with a
country with which India shares historical affinities.
Bilateral trade between India and Indonesia recorded
impressive growth to exceed US$ 3 bn during 2004. Public
Sector company IRCON secured a US$ 10 mn contract
for a toll road segment in Indonesia during the year and
explored business opportunities in the areas of railway
rehabilitation and the leasing of locomotives.

A delegation of the National Defence College (NDC)
visited Indonesia from 16-21 May 2004. The delegation
called on the Indonesian FM, TNI Chief, Secretary
General of Defence and the Governor of NDC’s
Indonesian counterpart, LAMHANNAS. The Fourth biannual Indonesia-India Coordinated Joint Naval Patrol
was conducted during the month of September 2004.
Eight Indian Naval Ships paid goodwill visits to Indonesian
ports from May-November 2004. These visits provided
the opportunity to develop closer contacts between our
respective Navies as well as the carrying out of passing
exercises between them. Two-way exchanges between the
Indian Armed Forces and the TNI in the area of military
training continued during the year. Fourteen TNI officers
are expected to undergo military training in India under
the ITEC-I scheme during 2004-05.

Lao PDR
The highlight of the year under review was the third IndiaASEAN Summit held in Vientiane, Lao PDR on 29–30
November 2004. This meeting coincided with the 10th
ASEAN Summit, 2nd ASEAN Business and Investment
Summit and the first ever India-ASEAN Car Rally.
In the margins of the India-ASEAN Summit, Hon’ble
Prime Minister of India met Lao President H.E. Khamtay
Siphandone on 29 November 2004 and discussed bilateral,
regional and global issues of mutual interest. Earlier, on
28 November 2004, PM met his Laos counterpart Prime
Minister H.E Bounhang Vorachit, who among other things
reiterated his country’s support to India’s candidature for
a permanent seat on the expanded UNSC. Lao-India
Entrepreneurship Development Centre was jointly
inaugurated by External Affairs Minister and Lao
Education Minister on 27 November 2004. The Centre
will spearhead entrepreneurship development in Lao PDR
and be a centre of excellence for facilitating creation of
viable and competitive new enterprises and strengthening
of the existing ones.

Indian assistance to Indonesia in the critical area of human
resource development under ITEC, Colombo Plan and
GCSS Scholarship Schemes was enhanced during the year,
with a total of 78 training slots being provided under ITEC,
38 under Colombo Plan and 20 under the GCSS Themes.
These slots were fully utilized.
Work on a Vocational Training Centre for the
Construction Sector in Jakarta, a Rs. 3.08-crore ITEC
Project, was undertaken by the implementing agency
NSIC during the year. The Centre will be ready for
commissioning by early 2005.

Lao-India IT Centre was also jointly inaugurated by
External Affairs Minister from Indian side and Prof. Dr.
Bountiem Phissamay, Minister in the Prime Minister’s
Office and the President of Science Technology and
Environment Agency, from the Lao side on 28 November
2004. This landmark project will go a long way in
contributing to the strengthening of digital opportunities
for economic growth, poverty reduction, employment
generation, sustainable use of resources, etc.

Cooperation in Space Research and Development for
peaceful purposes is an important component of our
bilateral S&T cooperation. ISRO and its Indonesian
counterpart LAPAN jointly operate a Space Telemetry,
Tracking and Command Ground Station (Biak TT&C-I)
for Satellites and Geostationary Launch Vehicles at Biak
in the Indonesian Province of Papua. The physical and
technological infrastructure at this important facility was
expanded and a second Ground Station (Biak TT&C II) established during the year with an US$ 875,000
investment from ISRO.

First India-ASEAN Car Rally was ceremonially flagged
off from Vientiane by Indian PM and PM of Lao PDR on
30 November 2004.
Lao PDR, as the Country Coordinator for India in the
ASEAN since July 2003 for a period of three years played
an active role in India’s greater integration with this
regional organisation. Laos also assumed the
Chairmanship of ASEAN w.e.f 1 July 2004. As the

A branch of JNICC, Jakarta was opened in Bali in October
2004 marking a significant step forward in the expansion
of our cultural presence in Indonesia. In conjunction with
ICCR, Indian Mission continued to enhance the activities
28

South East Asia and the Pacific

H. E. Bounnhang Vorachith, Prime Minister of Lao PDR & Dr. Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India flegging of the car rally from
Vientiane on 30 November, 2004. Leaders of ASEAN Countries are also seen in the photograph.

H.E. Bounnhang Vorachith, Prime Minister of Lao PDR and Dr. Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India flagging off the Car Rally from
Vientiane on 30 November 2004. Leaders of ASEAN countries are also seen in the photograph.

29

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

incoming Chairman of the 38th ASEAN Standing
Committee, Lao DPM and Foreign Minister H.E.
Somsavat Lengsavad highlighted India’s accession to the
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation.

economic ties was a key focus of PMB’s visit. In response
to Malaysia’s suggestion for a Free Trade Agreement
(FTA) between India and Malaysia, Prime Minister
proposed the establishment of a Joint Study Group to
examine the feasibility of a Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation Agreement (CECA). Both countries
identified Information Technology, Bio-technology,
Pharmaceuticals, Education, Health Care, Tourism and
other services as the areas where “Smart Partnerships”
could be formed.

An Indian company has signed a supply contract with
the Electricity Company of Laos for construction of 115kv
transmission line. The supply would be financed through
a Government of India line of credit for US$10 million.
India is also considering the construction of a Speciality
Hospital in Vientiane. A feasibility report on the project
has been completed by the HSCC (India) Limited in
September 2004. The proposed Speciality Hospital would
further strengthen the traditional and historic bonds and
enhance people-to-people contacts.

The bilateral cooperation in the infrastructural sector
especially in road construction, seaports, airports and
power continued to strengthen following many high level
visits. Mr. S. Samy Vellu, Minister of Works of Malaysia
visited India four times during the year. During the visits,
he met External Affairs Minister, Finance Minister,
Minister of Road Transport, Highways and Shipping and
Minister of Statistics and Programme Implementation and
led a 160 member delegation comprising senior political
leaders, businessmen, journalists, etc. to the Third Pravasi
Bharatiya Divas, which was held at Mumbai on 7-9
January 2005. Mr. Mustapa Mohamed, Minister in Prime
Minister’s Department of Malaysia attended the First
Ministerial Round Table Conference on Regional
Cooperation in Oil and Gas Economy held in New Delhi
on 6 January 2005. Malaysian delegation to the 3rd IndiaASEAN Business Summit held at New Delhi and Chennai
on 18-20 October 2004 was the largest from any ASEAN
country as in the earlier two Summits. At Chennai, the
delegation was led by Datuk Seri Mohd Ali Mohd Rustam,
the Chief Minister of Malacca. A parliamentary delegation
led by Deputy Speaker of Dewan Rakyat (House of
Commons) of Malaysia Datuk Lim Si Cheng and
consisting of Secretary of Parliament of Malaysia and six
other officials visited India from 3-8 November 2004 to
study the management and procedures of Parliament in
India.

Malaysia
India’s relations with Malaysia were further strengthened
and broadened during the year. Highlight of the year was
an official visit by Prime Minister of Malaysia Dato’ Seri
Abdullah Ahmad Badawi (PMB) to India from 19-23
December 2004. PMB was accompanied by five senior
Ministers, a number of senior officials and a large high
profile business delegation. During the visit, PMB called
on the President and Vice President and had one-to-one,
restricted and delegation level talks with Prime Minister.
He had separate meetings with External Affairs Minister,
Minister of Finance, Minister of Home Affairs, Minister
of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Smt. Sonia Gandhi,
Chairperson of the United Progressive Alliance. Three
agreements were signed in the presence of two Prime
Ministers, namely, an agreement to set up a Joint Venture
between the Antrix Corporation and MEASAT
International for joint marketing of satellite capacity; a
Letter of Intent signed by MEASAT for procurement,
launch and putting into orbit of MEASAT-4 satellite from
the Antrix Corporation; and a Concession Agreement
for the development, construction, operation and
maintenance of Hyderabad airport between the Civil
Aviation Ministry and a Consortium which included the
Malaysian Airports Berhad Holding (MABH). Twelve
Business-to-Business agreements were signed in presence
of PMB at India-Malaysia Business Forum, jointly
organized by FICCI and CII in New Delhi. The Jamia
Millia Islamia University conferred an honorary doctorate
on PMB on 21 December 2004. PMB also visited
Bangalore where he addressed a business meeting
organized by CII and visited the campuses of Biocon,
Infosys, HAL and Indian Institute of Science. Enhancing

The Minister of Power, Shri P.M. Sayeed visited Malaysia
on 11-12 September 2004 and called on the Malaysian
Minister of Works, Mr. S. Samy Vellu. To promote
participation of a large number of delegates from Malaysia
in the 3rd Pravasi Bharatiya Divas held in Mumbai on 79 January 2005, the Minister of State for Overseas Indian
Affairs, Shri Jagdish Tytler visited Kuala Lumpur from 2426 September 2004.
Malaysia is poised to become the largest trading partner
of India among the ASEAN countries with a total twoway bilateral trade of US$ 4.2 billion in 2004-2005. During
30

South East Asia and the Pacific

Organization, held recently with the conclusion of 23rd
Assembly Session of the IMO in London; and (ii) India’s
election to the UN Economic and Social Council for the
term 2005-07 during the 59th General Assembly Session
in New York on 28 October 2004.

April to October 2004, exports from India grew at 98 per
cent reaching US$ 727 million as against US$ 367 million
in the corresponding period of 2003. During the same
period, Indian imports from Malaysia recorded a growth
of 20% reaching US$ 1751 million in 2004 as compared
to US$ 1463 in 2003.

India offered 17 slots under the Government of India’s
ITEC/SFTC/Colombo Plan/Foreign Service Institute
programmes to Papua New Guinea during the year 200405. The courses utilized related to the fields of Statistics,
Journalism, Office Technology & Internet Applications,
Auditing in IT Environment, Networking Design, Small
Enterprise Financing, Urban Development, Information
Technology,
Entrepreneurship
Development,
Maintenance Engineering & Management, Food
Processing Enterprises for Women, Tourism and
Hospitality Management, Small Scale Industries,
Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats etc.

India and Malaysia had shown understanding and
cooperation by supporting each other’s candidates in
various multilateral institutions and fora. Defence
relations strengthened during the period with high level
official visits from both sides. From India, Deputy Chief
of Army Lt. Gen. P.P.S. Bhandari visited Malaysia from
12-16 April 2004 for the Defence Services Asia Exhibition
2004 and from the Malaysian side, the Chief of Royal
Malaysian Navy, Admiral Datuk Mohd Anwar bin Hj
Mohd Nor visited India from 6-9 September 2004. Two
Indian Coast Guard Ships CGS SAGAR and CGS VIVEK
visited Malaysia from 9-13 April 2004 and in reciprocity,
two Malaysian ship KD LEKIU and KD KASTURI visited
Mumbai from 8-12 September 2004.

Pacific Island Forum
The 35th meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum was held
in Apia (Samoa) on 5-7 August 2004. India attended the
16th Post-Forum Dialogue Partners meeting for the second
time on 9 August 2004.

A number of ICCR sponsored cultural programmes by
Kuchipudi dance group led by Mr. Veeranala Jayarama
Rao and Mrs. Banasri Rao, and Bharatanatyam group led
by Ms. Geeta Chandran were organized in Kuala Lumpur
as well as in other places. Ms. Sujata Chaudhry
participatted in the 10th Kuala Lumpur Poetry Reading
under the sponsorship of the ICCR.

India has significantly enhanced training slots to PIF
countries. Under India’s ITEC/SFTC/Colombo/FSI
training programmes, 17 slots have been allotted to Papua
New guinea, 13 to Solomon Islands and 10 to Vanuvatu
in the year 2004-2005. A team of experts was sent in MayJune 2004 to a few PIF countries namely, Fiji, Papua New
Guinea, Vanuatu to carry out ‘needs assessment’ and along
the way, hold consultations in Australia and New Zealand.
As a follow up to the visit, a work plan is being prepared
in consultation with different departments of the
government of India which will be involved in the
implementation.

Under the Amnesty Scheme declared by Malaysia from
29 October, nearly 4000 illegal Indian nationals left
Malaysia till November 2004 mostly with the help of High
Commission of India in Kuala Lumpur.

New Zealand
Prime Minister Helen Clark paid official visit to India from
16-20 October 2004. During the visit, she held wideranging discussions on international and bilateral issues.
She also visited Bangalore, Mumbai and Agra. Shri Jagdish
Tytler, Minister of State for Overseas Indians visited New
Zealand from 3-6 November 2004 in connection with the
Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas 2005 and met the members of
the Indian community.

India is also considering undertaking research on Kava, a
regional drink of the Pacific region. This exercise has the
potential for a long term positive impact on the indigenous
population of the pacific region in terms of poverty
reduction.
In response to a request from Government of Nauru for
assistance in repairing and updating their computer system
used for office operations of the Bank of Nauru, the
treasury, pay roll, government accounts, land and survey,
phosphate corporation, etc, the Government of India
deputed a computer engineer from (CMC Ltd.) Bangalore
in June 2004. The expert got the system back into

Papua New Guinea
India’s relations with Papua New Guinea (PNG) have
been steadily growing. PNG, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu
continue to support India’s candidature to various
International Organizations, including (i) India’s election
to the Executive Council of the International Maritime
31

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

operation and also suggested ways for improving the
system.

contacts between the two countries were maintained
during the period of the report.

Philippines

Mr. Goh Chok Tong, Prime Minister of Singapore visited
India from 8-11 July 2004. He was accompanied by the
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Law, Prof. S. Jayakumar
and Minister of Trade and Industry Mr. George Yeo. During
the visit, PM Goh called on Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam,
President and Shri Bhairon Singh Shekhawat, Vice
President of India. He also met Dr. Manmohan Singh,
Prime Minister, Mrs. Sonia Gandhi, President of the
Congress Party, Shri K. Natwar Singh, External Affairs
Minister, Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of Commerce and
Industry and Shri L.K. Advani, Leader of the Opposition
in the Lok Sabha. Prime Minister Goh was conferred by
the President of India with the Jawaharlal Nehru Award
for International Understanding for 2003.

Relations between India and the Philippines acquired
greater depth in political and economic arenas. External
Affairs Minister, Shri Natwar Singh, and the Philippine
Secretary, Foreign Affairs, Alberto G. Romulo, held a
bilateral meeting on the margins of the 3rd ASEAN-India
Business Summit at Vientiane in November 2004.
The expanding defence interaction between the two
countries got a further boost with the visit of five Indian
naval ships of the Eastern Fleet to Manila from 29 October
– 1 November 2004.
During the first ten months of 2004, bilateral trade was
US$285 million, with exports from India being US$207
million and imports from Philippines US$78 million.

Shri K. Natwar Singh, External Affairs Minister visited
Singapore on 3 July 2004. During his visit, he called on
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister Lee Kuan
Yew and Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong
(Presently Prime Minister).

In a breakthrough in commercial relations, an MoU
between PHARMEXCIL and the Philippine International
Trading Corporation (PITC) was signed on 6 November
2004 in Mumbai, paving the way for substantial growth
of exports of Indian medicines to the Philippines. The
MoU was signed during the visit of a Philippine delegation
to Mumbai, led by Roberto Pagdanganan, Chairman of
the PITC to attend the INDIA-CHEM 2004. A Philippine
business delegation led by the Chairman of the PhilippineIndia Business Council visited India on 19-21 October
2004 to participate in the 3rd India-ASEAN Business
Summit held in Delhi and Chennai.

Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister of State for Overseas Indian
Affairs visited Singapore from 22-24 September 2004 for
promoting Pravasi Bhartiya Divas 2005 held in Mumbai.
During his visit, he met Dr. Tharman Shanmugaratnam,
Minister for Education, Dr. Vivian Balakrishnan, Acting
Minister for Community Development, Youth and Sports
and Senior Minister of State for Trade & Industry and Dr.
Balaji Sadasivan, Senior Minister of State Information,
Communications and the Arts and Health. He also
addressed an Indian community function organized by the
Institute of South Asian Studies.

The Minister of State for Agriculture, Shri Kanti Lal
Bhuria, led a delegation to Manila to participate in the
International Rice Festival and International Rice Forum
held on 27-29 November 2004. In an indication of the
growing popularity of ITEC and Colombo Plan Training
Programmes, 62 training slots out of 68 have been utilised
so far.

Shri S. Jaipal Reddy, Minister of Information, Broadcasting
and Culture visited Singapore from 18-20 October 2004.
During the visit, he held talks with his counterpart, Dr.
Lee Boon Yang, Minister of Information, Communications
and the Arts on enhancing bilateral cooperation in the
fields of culture, information and broadcasting. He also
met Mr. S. Jayakumar, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Law. The 4th Executive Programme on Cooperation
in the fields of Arts, Heritage, Archives and Library
between India and Singapore was signed by Shri Alok
Prasad, High Commissioner of India and Dr. Tan Chin
Nam, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Information,
Communications and the Arts on 19 October 2004. Shri
Kamal Nath, Minister for Commerce and Industry
accompanied by Shri S.N. Menon, Commerce Secretary

Singapore
The period of the report witnessed further strengthening
and expansion of India-Singapore bilateral relations
marked by exchange of high-level visits of VIPs. Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh sent a message of
felicitation to Mr. Lee Hsien Loong, on assuming the post
of the third Prime Minister of Singapore on 12 August
2004. Shri K. Natwar Singh, External Affairs Minister
sent a congratulatory message to Mr. George Yeo, newly
appointed Foreign Minister of Singapore. High Level
32

South East Asia and the Pacific

The visiting Prime Minister of Malaysia Dato Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi calls on the Vice President Shri Bhairon Singh Shekhawat,
19-23 December 2004.

Prime Minister of Singapore Mr. Goh Chok Tong seen with President, Vice President and Prime Minister of India on 9 July 2004 before
receiving Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding for 2003. Shrimati Najma Heptulla, President of ICCR is also present.

33

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

visited Singapore from 10-12 November 2004. During his
visit, he met his counterpart Mr. Lim Hng Kiang, Trade
and Industry Minister of Singapore. The two sides
exchanged views on the bilateral trade and investment
matters, regional developments and reviewed progress of
the ongoing discussions on the bilateral Comprehensive
Economic Cooperation Agreement.

Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Education Minister,
Singapore led delegation to the 3rd Pravasi Bharatiya
Divas held at Mumbai from 7-9 January 2005. At the
session, he delivered address on “India- A Hub for
Globalization”.
The sixth round of Foreign Office Consultations were held
in Singapore on 4 November 2004. Shri Rajiv Sikri,
Secretary (East) led the Indian delegation. During the
visit he called on Mr. George Yeo, Minister of Foreign
Affairs.

Shri Narendra Modi, Chief Minister of Gujarat led a 13member business delegation to Singapore from 27-30
November 2004 in connection with the Global
Investment Summit 11-14 January 2005 to be held at
Ahmedabad. During the visit, he met Singapore’s Acting
Minister for Community Development, Youth and Sports
& Senior Minister of State for Trade Dr. Vivian
Balakrishnan. The delegation had meetings with Temasek
Holdings, Singapore Chinese Chamber of Commerce and
Industry and Singapore Indian Chamber of Commerce
and Industry. Shri Modi also addressed a seminar on:
“Making Inroads into Gujarat: Opportunities and
Strategies” organized by Institute of South Asian Studies
and Network India.

Foreign Secretary Shri Shashank visited Singapore on 2930 April 2004. During his visit, he met Mr. Tan Chin
Tiong, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and exchanged views on bilateral, regional and
international matters. He addressed a seminar at the
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies titled “Emerging Asia:
India’s Foreign Policy perspective”.
Since the signing of Declaration of Intent on
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement
(CECA) in April 2003, ten rounds of discussions led by
the Commerce Secretaries of two countries were held
alternatively in New Delhi and Singapore.

Singapore Minister for Trade and Industry Lim Hng Kiang
led a 25-member business delegation to the Third IndiaASEAN Business Summit held in New Delhi on 19
October 2004. During the visit, Mr. Lim met with Shri
Kamal Nath, Minister of Commerce and Industry and
Minister for Communications and IT Shri Dayanidhi
Maran.

The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) continued in
sending CEOs Mission to Singapore. CEOs Mission led
by Shri Anand Mahindra, President, CII, visited Singapore
on 15-16 April 2004. During the visit, the delegation
called on H.E. Mr. S.R. Nathan, President, Mr. Goh Chok
Tong, Prime Minister, Mr. Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime
Minister, Dr. Lee Boon Yang, Minister of Information,
Communications and the Arts, Dr. Balaji Sadasivan,
Minister of State for Heath and Transport and Mr.
Raymond Lim, Minister of State for Trade and Industry.

Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore, Dr. Tony Tan visited
India from 24 October to 2 November 2004. During the
visit, he met Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of Human
Resource Development, Shri K. Natwar Singh, External
Affairs Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister for
Defence and Shri Shivraj Patil, Minister of Home Affairs.
He delivered a lecture on “National Security after 9/11:
Singapore’s perspective” at the Observer Research
Foundation in New Delhi.

Shri Tarun Das, Chief Mentor of CII was presented with
PBM award for his contribution in promoting IndiaSingapore relations by the Singapore Government on 4
November 2004. He is the first Indian national to receive
such an honour from the Government of Singapore.

Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, Dean, Lee Kuan Yew
School of Public Policy of Singapore participated at the
International Seminar on “50 Years of Panchsheel:
Towards a New International Order based on Genuine
Multilateralism” Organised by the Indian Council of World
Affairs in New Delhi on 18 November 2004.

The India Calling 2004 Asia-Pacific Business Summit was
organized in Singapore from 9-10 July 2004 by the Indian
Merchants’ Chamber, Mumbai in collaboration with
Singapore Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
This was the first ever such Summit of the IMC held
outside India and attracted over 600 participants.

A delegation led by the Home Minister of Singapore, Mr.
Wong Kan Seng called on the Home Minister Shri Shivraj
Patil on 22 November 2004 and discussed bilateral
security-related issues between the two countries. Mr.

The Federation of Indian Export Organisation (FIEO)
organised the visit of two Indian delegations in the field
of healthcare (19-20 August 2004) and a multi-product
34

South East Asia and the Pacific

Solomon Islands. During the visit, the visiting Minister
had meetings with the External Affairs Minister, Minister
for Human Resource Development, Minister of State for
Information Technology and Minister of Commerce and
Industry. The visiting Minister had preliminary discussions
on possibilities of increasing cooperation with India in
diverse areas.

(23-25 September 2004). A 34 member strong Singapore
business delegation led by Mr. M. Rajaram, Chairman,
Singapore Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and Mr. Kwek Leng Joo, President, Singapore Chinese
Chamber of Commerce and Industry attended the
“Partnership Summit 2005” organized by the
Confederation of Indian Industry in Kolkata from 12-14
January 2005.

Thailand

Defence relations continued to strengthen between the
two countries. Shri Ajay Prasad, Defence Secretary led
the Indian delegation at Asian Security Conference,
“Shangri-La dialogue” held in Singapore from 4-6 June
2004.

India’s relationship with Thailand continued to further
deepen and widen in all important spheres with the
exchange of high level visits and strengthening of
economic & trade links. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh accompanied by a high-level delegation comprising
External Affairs Minister, Minister of Commerce &
Industry, and the National Security Advisor attended the
BIMSTEC Summit in Bangkok from 29-31 July 2004.
India offered to host a Ministerial Conference on Energy
Cooperation in 2005; convene a working group to discuss
counter terrorism measures and host a round table/
workshop of Tourism Ministers and the travel industry.
India also agreed to host the second BIMSTEC Summit
in 2006. PM, along with other leaders, had an audience
with His Majesty King Bhumibol Adulyadej. On the
sidelines, PM had substantive discussions with Thai PM
Dr. Thaksin Shinawatra on a wide range of bilateral,
regional and international issues of common concern.
Both the Prime Ministers welcomed the swift progress in
the negotiations for implementing the early harvest
scheme under the framework agreement for establishing
a free trade area between India and Thailand.

The Singapore Chief of Navy (CNV), RADM Ronnie Tay
visited India from 27-30 September 2004. During the visit,
he paid a courtesy call on the Chief of Army Staff, Chief
of Air Staff and Chief of Naval Staff. Chief of Air Force
Major-General Lim Kim Choon visited India form 24 29 October 2004. He also visited the SINDEX exercise
between the Republic of Singapore Air Force (RSAF) and
the Indian Air Force (IAF) at Gwalior. The exercise was
the first-ever bilateral exercise between the two air forces.
Three ships of the Eastern Fleet of the Indian Navy, INS
Ranvir, INS Udaygiri and INS Kora visited Singapore on
17-18 May 2004.
5th International Indian Film Academy (IIFA) Awards
were held in Singapore on 22 May 2004. The event was
attended by leading Indian film stars. President H.E. Mr.
S.R. Nathan of Singapore was the Guest of Honour at
the function.

The Thai Foreign Minister Dr. Surakiart Sathirathai
visited Delhi in June 2004 to establish contact with the
new government and again in November 2004 to
participate in the Hindustan Times Conference on “India
and the World” in New Delhi. During these visits, he had
extensive discussions on bilateral relations and
cooperation in the regional and global context. External
Affairs Minister, during his transit visit to Bangkok on
15-16 October 2004, met Dr. Surakiart Sathirathai to
review bilateral relations. Both Foreign Ministers also met
in New York in September 2004 on the sidelines of the
UNGA and in Kazakhstan in October 2004 on the
sidelines of the CICA meeting. External Affairs Minister
called on the Thai PM in June 2004 on the sidelines of
the ACD meeting in Qingdao. Other important high-level
visits from India to Thailand included those of (i) Shri
Dayanidhi Maran, Minister of C&IT in July 2004 to attend
the APT Ministerial Conference on Broadband and ICT

An ICCR sponsored culture troupe from Shriram
Bharatiya Kala Kendra, New Delhi performed their famous
Ram Lila in ballet form as part of a major conference and
exhibition portraying the widespread influence of the
Ramayana in Southeast Asian countries on 14 September
2004. President H.E. Mr. S.R. Nathan attended the
performance.
The ‘1st India - ASEAN Car Rally’ reached Singapore on
its penultimate leg on 10 December 2004. The rally was
welcomed by Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong and a highlevel delegation which came from India.

Solomon Islands
The Foreign Minister of Solomon Islands Mr. Laurie Chan
visited India from 17 to 18 January 2005. This was the
first ever visit at the level of Foreign Minister from
35

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

held in Thailand from 31 August-1 September 2004 and
covered various aspects of security cooperation. The
Indian delegation was led by Shri Rajiv Sikri, Secretary
(East) and the Thai delegation by Gen. Winai Phattiyakul,
Secretary General of the Thai National Security Council.

development; (ii) Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of
Health & Family Welfare in July 2004 to attend the 2nd
Asia-Pacific Meeting on HIV/AIDS and the XV
International AIDS Conference; (iii) Smt. Sonia Gandhi,
Chairperson of UPA, addressed the closing session of the
XV International AIDS Conference on 16 July at
Bangkok. On the margins, she called on Thai PM Thaksin
Shinawatra, and Thai FM Dr. Surakiart Sathirathai called
on her; (iv) Shri Mata Prasad Pandey, Speaker of the UP
Assembly in August 2004 for a study tour; (v) Dr. Shakeel
Ahmed, Minister of State (ICT) to attend the 4th ASEAN
Telecommunications and IT Ministers’ Meeting in August;
and (vi) Shri N.N. Meena, Minister of State (Environment
& Forests) in November 2004 to participate in the 3rd
IUCN World Conservation Congress.

The second Joint Working Group Meeting on Space
cooperation was held in Bangalore from 20-22 October
2004 to identify further areas of cooperation. A 10member group of Scientists from Thailand underwent
training at a course at the Indian Institute of Remote
Sensing (IIRS), Dehra Dun, from 27 November to 31
December 2004.
Bilateral cooperation in defence further strengthened with
exchange of high-level visits. Lt. Gen. Vicha Techwanich,
Director General of Royal Thai Army, Ordnance
Department, led a team to the Defence Expo-2004 in New
Delhi in February 2004. The practice of offering one
vacancy each in the National Defence College and
Defence Services Staff College to the Thai Armed Forces
every year continued. Two Indian Coast Guard ships
visited Bangkok Port on a goodwill visit in March-April
2004 and two Indian Naval ships paid a goodwill visit to
Phuket Port in October 2004.

Some important visits from Thailand to India were: (i)
High-level delegation led by Governor of Phuket Province,
Mr. Udomsak Uswarangkura to Port Blair in June 2004
for discussing linkages including trade & investment,
tourism etc.; (ii) Mr. Korn Thapparansi, Minister of
Science & Technology to Chennai and Bangalore in July
2004 and again in November 2004 with a group of 100
students to participate in the Infosys 20-week IT Training
Camp at Mysore; (iii) Dr. Pranpree Bahiddha-Nukara,
Vice-Minister of Commerce in July 2004 for discussions
with India’s Commerce and Industry Minister to finalize
details of products to be included in the Early Harvest
Scheme (E.H.S) list under the India-Thailand FTA, and
again on 16 December 2004 when an MoU was signed
between the FICCI & FTI; (iv) Mr. Uthai Pimchaichon,
Speaker of the House of Representatives in July 2004 led
a 10-member delegation and met the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha and called on the President and the Vice-President;
(v) Mr. Wattana Muangsook, Minister of Commerce led
a high-level delegation in August 2004 and met Shri
Kamal Nath, Minister of C&I for signing the protocol to
implement the E.H.S under the FTA; (vi) Mr. Anutin
Charvirakural, Dy. Minister of Commerce for attending
the third India-ASEAN Business Summit in New Delhi
and Chennai in October 2004; (vii) Princess Chulabhorn
Mahidol in November 2004 to attend an International
Conference on Chemistry Biology Interface at Delhi
University, and (viii) Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn
in February 2005 on an official visit at the invitation of
Vice President. As part of her programme, Princess Maha
Chakri also visited States of Himachal Pradesh,
Karnataka, Sikkim and Goa. She inaugurated the Thai
temple at Kushinagar.

Bilateral trade has continued to grow and Thailand has
emerged as an important partner in the region. Indian
exports to Thailand in the first 11 months of 2004 reached
a figure of US$1066 million whereas, India’s imports from
Thailand for the same period amounted to US$828
million. The highlight of the year was the conclusion of
negotiations and signing of the Protocol on the Early
Harvest Scheme (EHS) under the Framework Agreement
for Bilateral Free Trade Area, covering 82 items of interest
to both sides, which came into effect from 1 September
2004.
Important economic and trade promotion activities in
which India participated in Thailand were: (i) Bangkok
International Gift Fair in April 2004; (ii) the Conference
on Competitiveness: Challenges and opportunities for
Asian Countries in July 2004 - DG, CSIR accompanied
by prominent Indian businessmen participated; (iii) a
Buyer-Seller Meeting by Engineering Export Promotion
Council in July 2004; (iv) Made in India Show by CII in
August 2004, jointly inaugurated by Thai Minister of
Commerce and Shri EVKS Elangovan, Minister of State
(C&I); (v) Bangkok Gems and Jewellery Fair in September
2004; (vi) CII sponsored participation at hospital
management Asia 2004 Conference in October 2004; and
(vii) visit of a delegation from Indian Machine Tools

The third Joint Working Group Meeting on Security was
36

South East Asia and the Pacific

of Hanoi from French occupation and his meeting with
President Ho Chi Minh on 17 October 1954. Institute of
International Relations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Vietnam, organised a seminar on this occasion, which was
addressed by External Affairs Minister and Foreign
Minister of Vietnam Mr. Nguyen Dy Nien. The same day
Vietnam Union of Friendship Organisations (VUFO)
organised a cultural function to mark the event, which
was attended by the two Foreign Ministers, Minister of
Science & Technology Mr. Hoang Van Phong, in his
capacity as the President of Vietnam-India Friendship
Association (VIFA), and Mr. Pham The Duyet, President
Vietnam Fatherland Front. External Affairs Minister also
called on Vietnam Prime Minister H.E. Mr. Phan Van Khai
and the legendary General Vo Nguyen Giap.

Manufacturers Association for market development in
November 2004.
Besides, a large number of individual commercial
delegations exchanged visits for promoting trade and
investment ties.
The traditional cultural ties continued to grow. Important
events included: (i) Kuchipudi dance by Guru Jayarama
Rao in August 2004; (ii) Photo exhibition entitled “The
Path of Compassion” in September 2004; and (iii) Indian
classical music by Dr. Leelavati Adsule in September 2004.
India offered 119 scholarships to Thai nationals under
the various schemes.
The first ever India-ASEAN Car Rally which was flagged
off by Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh at Guwahati
on 22 November 2004, travelled through Thailand on its
first leg from Mae Sai to Nong Khai (28-30 November
2004). It completed its second leg from Aranya Prathet
to Sadao through Bangkok, where it was flagged off by
the Thai Deputy Prime Minister Suwat Liptapanlop, in
December 2004, before terminating at Batam, Indonesia.
Three teams (including one media team) from Thailand
participated. HRH Princess Chulabhorn Mahidol, on
behalf of His Majesty the King of Thailand, planted seven
of the forty Sal Saplings gifted by India, at the Buddha
Manthan Park on 25 December 2004.

External Affairs Minister also co-chaired the 12th Meeting
of the India-Vietnam Joint Commission on 18 October
2004 with Foreign Minister Mr. Nien. The Joint
Commission Meeting was preceded by Senior Officials’
Meeting on 15 October 2004, led by Smt. S. Tripathy,
Additional Secretary (PP & CPV) from the Indian side
and Dr. Do Ngoc Son, Asst Minister and Director General,
Asia II Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs from the
Vietnam side. The two sides also signed a Plan of Action
for 2004-2006 for implementing the Joint Declaration on
Comprehensive Cooperation Framework between India
and Vietnam signed in May 2003 during the visit of the
General Secretary of Communist Party of Vietnam to
India.

Ambassador L.K. Ponappa, on completion of her tenure,
left Bangkok on 24 December 2004. The Thai Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister, amongst others, hosted
separate farewell lunches for Ambassador. India’s new
Ambassador to Thailand Shri Vivek Katju took charge of
his post in February 2005.

Minister of State for Tourism, Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
visited Vietnam from 11-14 June 2004 to attend the
Ministerial Conference on Cultural Tourism and Poverty
Alleviation in Hue, organised by World Tourism
Organisation. She also met the Chairperson of Vietnam
National Administration of Tourism Madam Vo Thi
Thang to discuss promotion of tourism between India and
Vietnam.

Timor-Leste
India’s cordial relations with the new nation of TimorLeste continued to develop during the year. In addition
to the provision of ITEC training and GCSS Scholarships,
an IT Capacity Building Project was identified for
implementation under ITEC. A detailed feasibility study
for this project was conducted by an NIC team in TimorLeste in November 2004. The project, which is likely to
be taken up next year, was greatly welcomed by the
Government of Timor-Leste.

Madam Vo Thi Thang visited India from 16-21 October
2004 to attend the Regional Tourism Fair in New Delhi.
She also represented Vietnam at the 3rd India-ASEAN
Business Summit.
Minister of State for Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation, Kumari Selja visited Vietnam from 19 to 22
December 2004 to attend the Asia-Pacific Regional
Conference on Dialogue among Cultures and Civilizations
for Peace and Sustainable Development. She delivered
the keynote speech at the inaugural session of the
Conference.

Vietnam
External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh visited
Hanoi from 16-18 October 2004 to commemorate the
50th anniversary of Prime Minister Pandit Jawahar Lal
Nehru’s visit to Hanoi in October 1954 after the liberation
37

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Secretary (ANA) Shri R.M. Abhyankar visited Vietnam
on 4-5 May 2004 as a special envoy of External Affairs
Minister and called on the Vietnamese Foreign Minister.
The 2nd Foreign Office Consultations between India and
Vietnam were held in New Delhi on 5 August 2004. The
Vietnamese side was led by Vice-Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Le Cong Phung, and the Indian side by Special
Secretary (East), Shri Rajiv Sikri.

Indian exports to Vietnam for January-November 2004
reached US$518.09 million registering an increase of over
30 per cent vis-à-vis the corresponding period in 2003.
The major items were animal feed (Soya bean meal), drugs
and pharmaceuticals, plastics, steel, textile and garment
accessories etc. Important trade promotional activities
during the year included: (i) visit to Hanoi by a 10-member
delegation from Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals &
Cosmetics Export Promotion Council (CHEMEXCIL) in
February 2004; (ii) organization of a Catalogue Show at
the prestigious Vietnam International Industrial Fair 2004
in October-November 2004; (iii) Catalogue-based
participation at Vietnam International Agriculture Fair;
(iv) ITPO sponsored visit of eight Indian companies to
represent at the 14th Vietnam International Trade Fair
(VIETNAM EXPO 2004) in April 2004; (v) Vietnam’s
participation at 24th India International Trade Fair 2004
in New Delhi in November 2004; (vi) visit of a six-member
CII delegation to HCM City from 10-13 December 2004;
(vii) Participation by a six-member delegation from
PLEXCONCIL in the Vietnam International Industry Fair
at Hanoi from 1- 4 December 2004.

A 12-member delegation from the Office of National
Assembly of Vietnam, led by Madam Tran Thi Tam Dan,
Chairperson of the Committee for Culture, Education,
Youth and Children Affairs visited India from 3-9 July
2004. The delegation called on the Speaker and the
Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha and officials in the relevant
Ministries.
A delegation led by Mr. Trang A. Pao, a Member of the
National Assembly and Chairman of its Council for Ethnic
Minorities paid a visit to India from 13-19 December 2004.
The delegation called on the Hon’ble Speaker of Lok
Sabha during their visit.
Gen. Pham Van Tra, Minister for National Defence of
Vietnam, accompanied by a high-level delegation, visited
India from 3-7 March 2005.

A 3-member delegation led by Shri S.S. Kapur, Joint
Secretary, Department of Commerce visited Hue on 31
July 2004 to attend the 5th ASEAN-Senior Economic
Officials Meeting (SEOM) – India consultations.

Three Indian naval ships namely, INS Ranvijay, INS
Sukanya and INS Kirch commanded by Rear Admiral S.K.
Damle, FOC Eastern Fleet, paid a goodwill visit to Ho
Chi Minh City in November 2004. Vice Admiral O.P.
Bansal, FOC-in-C, Eastern Naval Command, also visited
Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City at the same time and met
Deputy Minister of Defence and Chief of the General Staff
of Vietnam People’s Army, Senior Lt. General Phung
Quang Thanh.

A Book entitled “India-Vietnam Relations: First to Twenty
First Century” written by Shri Geetesh Sharma, President
of Indo-Vietnam Solidarity Committee, Kolkata was
introduced at a Press Conference on 1 December 2004
which was organised at the premises of the CGI, HCM
City.
The 1st India-ASEAN Car Rally passed through Vietnam
from 1 - 4 December 2004. The main cities covered by
the Rally were Hue, Nha Trang, Ho Chi Minh City. The
Government of Vietnam and the provincial authorities
of Vietnam extended warm hospitality and made elaborate
arrangements for the conduct of the Rally. Government
of Vietnam allowed the right-hand drive vehicles to enter
the country as a special case.

A 15-member delegation from the National Defence
College led by AVM A.K. Tiwary, VSM visited Vietnam
in May 2004.
All 20 scholarships allocated to Vietnam under CEP/
GCSS are likely to be utilised. Under ITEC, the allocation
of 110 slots to Vietnam is also likely to be utilized fully.
Amongst the important cultural promotion and publicity
related activities during the year were: (i) introduction of
Vietnamese version of “India-Perspectives” by the Embassy
in Hanoi; (ii) visit of an 8-member Sattriya Dance group
led by Shri P.P. Bora from 10-18 June 2004 to participate
in the biennial Hue Festival 2004; and (iii) publication of
tourism brochure in local language by CGI, Ho Chi Minh
in April.

A 15-member NCC delegation visited Vietnam from 1014 December 2004. During their stay, they visited Youth
Cultural House, Cu Chi tunnels and War Remnants
Museum in HCM City and had interaction with
Vietnamese youth organizations.

38

East Asia

Japan

3

Information Technology Shri Dayanidhi Maran visited
Japan from 17-19 January 2005. During the visit, he held
discussions with Minister for Internal Affairs and
Communication of Japan Mr. Taro Aso on strengthening
cooperation in fields of Information and Communication
Technology. Minister of State, Prime Minister’s Office Shri
Prithvi Raj Chavan visited Japan from 24-26 November
2004 to attend the third round of the Indo-Japan Dialogue
on Ocean Security.

I

ndia values its close, cooperative and friendly relations
with Japan. The Global Partnership for the 21st Century
that India and Japan jointly established in August 2000
contributes not only towards broadening and deepening
of our bilateral relations but also for the stability and
prosperity of Asia and the world. Global Partnership also
involves the two countries jointly addressing various issues
of global concern. There is a shared recognition in both
countries of their common cultural heritage, commitment
to democratic ideals, economic complementarities and
strategic convergences. These commonalities between the
two countries have provided a resilient foundation for
multifaceted relationship of cooperation. The period
2004-05 was an active year in bilateral relations between
India and Japan. The momentum of exchanges between
the two countries was continued during this year in
pursuance of our continuing efforts to consolidate the
Global Partnership.

Japanese Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi visited India
from 12-14 August 2004. During the visit, she held talks
with the External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh
on strengthening the Global Partnership between the two
countries as well as on other issues. Both sides agreed to
support each other’s candidature for a permanent seat in
the expanded UN Security Council and closely work
together towards realising the reform of the UN Security
Council. It was also agreed to establish a Joint Working
Group on Counter Terrorism and initiate DG level
dialogue on UN reforms. Ms. Kawaguchi also called on
Prime Minister and National Security Adviser.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met Prime Minister
of Japan Mr. Junichiro Koizumi on the sidelines of ASEAN
Summit in Vientiane, Laos on 29 November 2004 during
which both leaders discussed issues of mutual concern.
Shri Somnath Chatterjee, Speaker of the Lok Sabha led a
delegation of members of both Houses of Parliament to
Japan from 31 October – 5 November 2004 at the
invitation of the Speaker of the Lower House of the
Japanese Diet and the President of the Upper House.
During the visit, the Speaker called on the Emperor, the
Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister of Japan and held
discussions with the Presiding Officers of the two Houses
of the Japanese Diet.

Minister of Economy, Trade & Industry (METI) of Japan
Mr. Shoichi Nakagawa visited India from 22-30 August
2004. During his visit, he called on Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh and held discussions with the Ministers
for Commerce & Industry and Finance. He again visited
India to attend the first Round Table on Energy Security
held in New Delhi on 6 January 2005. During the visit,
Mr. Nakagawa held discussions with Minister for
Petroleum and Natural Gas Shri Mani Shankar Aiyyar
and Minister for Commerce & Industry Shri Kamal Nath.
Finance Minister of Japan Mr. Sadakazu Tanigaki visited
India from 12-14 January 2005. During the visit, Mr.
Tanigaki called on Prime Minister and held discussions
with Minister for Finance Shri P. Chidambaram and
Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission Shri Montek
Singh Ahluwalia. Mr. Heizo Takenaka, Minister for
Economic and Fiscal Policy visited India from 12-13
January 2005. During the visit, Mr. Takenaka met Minister
of Finance Shri P. Chidambaram and Deputy Chairman,

Former President Shri K.R. Narayanan visited Japan from
18-24 October 2004 at the invitation of the Friendship
Exchange Council (FEC). During his visit, the former
President and Shrimati Narayanan addressed the FEC and
called on the Presiding Officers of the two Houses, the
Foreign Minister and Prince and Princess Akishino of the
Japanese Imperial Family. Minister of Communication &

39

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Planning Commission Shri Montek Singh Ahluwalia.
Senior Vice Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Mr. Takayoshi Tsuneda visited India from 11-13 January
2005 and met Minister of State for Agriculture Shri
Kantilal Bhuria.

Vice Admiral Sangram Singh Byce, visited Tokyo from
11-13 October 2004 to attend the Chiefs of Defence
Conference. Three Indian Naval Ships Ranjjt, Ranvijay
and Jyoti under the Command of Rear Admiral Sunil K
Damle, Flag Officer Commanding Eastern Fleet, visited
Tokyo on goodwill visit from 22-24 October 2004. A USI
delegation visited Tokyo to attend 2nd Tokyo-New Delhi
“Peace in Asia” International Exchange Conference from
24-28 October 2004.

Other visits from India during the year included those of
Governor of Uttaranchal Shri Sudarshan Agarwal from
20-26 May 2004; Speaker of Uttar Pradesh Legislative
Assembly Shri Mata Prasad Pandey from 28-29 August
2004 for pre-conference study tour before attending 50th
Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference at Canada;
Speaker of Rajasthan Legislative Assembly Smt. Sumitra
Singh from 15-17 September 2004 for post-conference
study tour after attending 50th Commonwealth
Parliamentary Conference at Canada and Minister for
Transport & Power of Government of NCT of Delhi Shri
Harun Yusuf from 17-22 October 2004 to attend the 11th
World Congress on ITS at Nagoya, Aiichi.

Mr. Takemasa Moriya, Administrative Vice Minister of
the Japan Defence Agency visited India from 23-27 May
2004. A Japan Coast Guard delegation led by Vice
Commandant Kenji Ishii and one Japan Coast Guard Ship
visited Mumbai from 2-5 November 2004 for taking part
in a joint exercise with the Indian Coast Guard.
India-Japan Mixed Cultural Commission meeting was held
in Tokyo on 9 February 2005. During the year our Embassy
in Tokyo organised several cultural events and exhibitions
including performances of a Kathakali troupe, a Kuchipudi
troupe and a Rajasthani troupe sent by ICCR. The
Embassy also supported organization of several Indian
exhibitions, concerts and classical dance performances
hosted by Japanese organizations. The Embassy also
organised a fortnight long exhibition titled ‘Path of
Compassion’, featuring photographs of Buddhist sites and
art heritage by Benoy K. Behl at Otani University from 725 September 2004. The inauguration of the exhibition
was preceded by a conference on “Buddhist heritage”.

Other visits from Japan to India during the year included
the visits of Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
Japan Mr. Shogo Arai from 15-19 July 2004, Member of
Parliament and Chairman of the Asian Population &
Development Association Mr. Shin Sakurai from 20-22
July 2004, and Member of Parliament from the Democratic
Party of Japan Mr. Kazuo Inoue from 22-27 September
2004.
The XI round of Foreign Office Consultations with Japan
were held in New Delhi on 22 December 2004 during
which both sides discussed bilateral relations as well as
regional and global issues.

The total India-Japan bilateral trade in the 2003-04 was
US $ 4.35 billion with exports to Japan being US $ 1.71
billion and imports from Japan being US $ 2.64 billion.
There was a growth of 18 per cent in India-Japan bilateral
trade during 2003-04 as compared to the corresponding
period of last year. Cumulative foreign direct investment
inflows from Japan during 1991-2004 (net of ADRs/
GDRs) was US $ 1.86 billion, excluding FDI inflows
received for acquisition of existing shares (up to 1999),
RBI’s-NRI Schemes, stock swapped & advance pending
issue of shares.

India-Japan Science Council Meeting was held in Tokyo
on 28-29 January 2005. Regular defence exchanges
between the two countries continued to take place during
the year. General NC Vij, Chief of Army Staff visited Tokyo
on 25 and 26 March 2004 and met Chief of Staff, Japan
Ground Self Defence Force. A National Defence College
delegation led by Air Vice Marshal AK Tiwari, visited
Japan in May 2004. Vice Admiral Sureesh Mehta, Director
Coast Guard and Commandant KPS Raghuvanshi visited
Japan to attend the meeting of Heads of Coast Guard
Agencies of Asia from 16-19 June 2004. Air Chief Marshal
S Krishnaswamy, Chief of Air Staff visited Japan from 2024 July 2004 on goodwill visit. This was the first ever
official visit by an Indian Air Chief to Japan. Air Marshal
SK Malik, Vice Chief of the Air Staff attended Air Chiefs
Conference in Japan (ACCJ) from 23-26 September 2004.

Functional Exchanges:
From India to Japan:
Dr. Harsh K. Gupta, Secretary, Department of
Ocean Development, New Delhi, from 22-24 April
2004, to attend Nippon Foundation’s First Meeting
of Research Task Force on National Ocean Policies
held in Tokyo.
Shri K.N. Agarwal, Member Secretary and Secretary
40

East Asia

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh meets the Prime Minister of China Mr. Wen Jiabao on the sidelines of ASEAN Summit
in Vientiane, Laos on 29 November 2004.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh meets the Japanese Prime Minister Mr. Junichiro Koizumi on the sidelines of ASEAN Summit in
Vientiane, Laos on 29 November 2004.

41

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

the two countries has been developing during these years
on the strong foundations of commitment to democratic
ideals and the shared desire to consolidate and diversify
their exchanges. The year 2004-05 was also significant in
that the two sides agreed to establish a “Long-term
Cooperative Partnership for Peace and Prosperity” with
the aim of fully utilizing the substantial potential and
opportunities for deepening mutually beneficial
cooperation, taking advantage of their economic
complementarities and political convergences. President
of Republic of Korea (ROK) Mr. Roh Moo-hyun visited
India from 4-6 October 2004. He was accompanied by a
high-level delegation including four Ministers (Foreign
Affairs and Trade; Commerce, Industry and Energy;
Information and Communication; and Trade) and his
National Security Advisor. During the visit, President Roh
met President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam and held discussions
with Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh on a wide range
of bilateral, multilateral and global issues. A Joint
Statement was issued during the visit outlining a broad
vision of the bilateral relationship. An Extradition Treaty
and a Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters were also signed during the visit. Both sides also
agreed to further promote their exchanges and interaction
in the defence field.

to Government of India, Law Commission and Dr.
K.N. Chaturvedi, Member Secretary, Law
Commission visited Japan from 19-22 May 2004 to
attend 1st ACD Workshop in Tokyo.
Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Secretary (Environment &
Forests) visited Japan from 14-16 September 2004,
to attend Informal Meeting on Further Actions
Against Climate Change, jointly organized by
Goverments of Japan and Brazil.
Dr. M.G.K. Menon, M.N. Shah Distinguished
Fellow, The National Academy of Sciences, from
21 to 23 September 2004, to attend Seminar on
‘Dialogue between Civilizations, Science,
Technology and Civilization” in Tokyo.
Shri Rajiv Sikri, Secretary (East), Ministry of
External Affairs visited Tokyo from 13-14 October
2004 and participated in Third Donors Conference
on International Reconstruction Fund Facility for
Iraq.
A delegation led by Chairman Railway Board visited
Japan from 8-11 November 2004 to attend the
International High Speed Railway Conference.
A CII delegation headed by its President visited
Japan from 14-18 November 2004 to participate in
Science & Technology Society Forum and hold
business meetings with Japanese business
organizations.

President Roh was also accompanied by a large business
delegation including CEOs of major Korean companies,
thus, signifying the economic aspect of the visit. During
the discussions, it was decided to step up efforts to take
bilateral economic partnership to a higher level taking
advantage of complementarities in economies and
synergies in trade, investment and high-tech areas. Both
sides agreed to set a target of US $ 10 billion for bilateral
trade by 2008. It was also agreed to set up a Joint Study
Group composed of government officials, economists and
representatives of business community to take a
comprehensive view of the bilateral linkages in trade,
investment and services.

Shri A.K. Rastogi, Secretary (BM), Ministry of
Home Affairs visited Kobe, Japan from 18-22 January
2005 to attend the UN Conference on disaster
reduction.
The Embassy of India in Tokyo issued 29,272 visas
(out of which 5,645 were business visas and 13,150
tourist visas), granted 397 fresh passports, 22
emergency certificates and rendered consular
services to 964 Indian nationals during the period 1
April – 31 October 2004.

ROK Vice Minister of Commerce, Industry and Energy
Mr. Chow Hwan-eik visited India to attend the Round
Table on Energy Security held in New Delhi on 6 January
2005.

Republic of Korea (ROK)
There was steady progress in India-ROK relations with
regular exchange of high level visits, increasing economic
and commercial links and interaction between the two
countries in the international fora.

A Parliamentary delegation from ROK led by Mr. Park
Hee-tae, Vice Speaker, National Assembly of the ROK
visited India from 30 January – 2 February 2005.

The year 2004-05 marked the 30th Anniversary of
establishment of diplomatic relations between India and
the Republic of Korea. The traditional friendship between

External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh met ROK
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade Mr. Ban Ki-moon
42

East Asia

on the margins of the Third Ministerial Meeting of the
ACD held in Qingdao, China on 21 June 2004 and again
on the margins of the 11th Meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of ASEAN Regional Forum held in Jakarta from
1-2 July 2004.

0.76 billion and imports being US $ 2.45 billion. ROK’s
investment approvals in India are close to US $ 3 billion.
Actual inflow from ROK for the period 1991-2004 has
been US $ 657.0 million. The Korea Trade Investment
Promotion Agency opened its third office in India in
Mumbai in June 2004.

External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh visited
ROK from 14-16 December 2004 to co-chair the third
session of the India-ROK Joint Commission held in Seoul
on 15 December 2004. The two sides discussed bilateral
relations, regional and global issues during the meeting.

Tatas became the first Indian company to invest in South
Korea. They invested US $ 120 million by acquiring
Daewoo Commercial Vehicles at Gunsan in South Korea
in March 2004 As part of the celebrations of the 30th
Anniversary of establishment of diplomatic relations
between India and the ROK, CII sent an 11-member
SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises) Mission to Seoul
from 8 to 10 August 2004. The Mission had meetings
with the Federation of Korean Industry, Korea
International Trade Association, Incheon Chamber of
Commerce & Industries and Korea Federation of Small
& Medium Business (KFSB). CII also signed an MoU for
cooperation with KFSB.

Both sides reiterated the importance of maintaining close
and regular consultations so as to further strengthen
bilateral cooperation in various areas. Both sides reiterated
their desire to promote cooperation in various areas
including, inter alia, infrastructure, information and\
communication technology, petrochemicals, textiles, oil
and gas field development, automobiles, shipbuilding, iron
and steel, pharmaceuticals and agriculture. The two sides
also agreed to strengthen bilateral cooperation in
international affairs and reiterated their commitment to
continue the fight against terrorism. The Cultural
Exchange Programme between India and ROK for the
period 2004-07 was also signed during the visit. During
his visit, External Affairs Minister also called on the ROK
President Mr. Roh Moo-hyun and Speaker of the ROK
National Assembly Mr. Kim Won-ki.

The Sixth India-ROK Cultural Committee Meeting was
held on 13 May 2004 in New Delhi which finalised and
initialled the Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP) for
the years from 2004 to 2007. A team of performing artists
from India participated in the Gangneung International
Folklore Festival in June 2004. Indian cultural troupes
participated in the Gwacheon Hanmadong Festival from
14 - 19 September 2004.

Minister of Shipping, Highways and Road Transport Shri
T.R. Balu visited ROK from 19-22 January 2005. During
the visit, Shri Balu held bilateral discussions with ROK
Minister of Commerce, Industry & Energy Mr. Hee Beom
Lee. Shri Balu also attended the naming ceremony of MT
“Desh Ujala” being built by Hyundai Heavy Industries
for Shipping Corporation of India. Foreign Office level
consultations at the level of Director General in the ROK
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and Joint Secretary,
East Asia, Ministry of External Affairs were held in Seoul
on 12 April 2004. A meeting of the Senior Officials of
the Ministerial level Joint Trade Committee was held in
New Delhi on 19-20 August 2004. The first Foreign Policy
and Security Dialogue between India and ROK was held
in New Delhi on 20 January 2005.

The President of Korean Institute of Science and
Technology visited IIT, Mumbai and IIS, Bangalore on 17
and 18 May 2004 to discuss possibility of cooperation in
exchange of research personnel, exchange of technical
information and promotion of joint research.
The preparatory meeting of the India-ROK Joint Working
Group for bilateral cooperation in Information and
Communication Technology sector was held in New Delhi
on 13 December 2004.
Functional Exchanges
From India to Republic of Korea:
Justice Brijesh Kumar, Judge, Supreme Court visited
ROK from 10-15 April 2004 at the invitation of
Justice and Minister of the Court Administration of
Supreme Court of Korea.

The first meeting of the India-ROK Joint Study Group
was held in New Delhi on 27-28 January 2005. The ROK
side was led by Mr. Jong-Ki Hong, Deputy Minister for
Trade while Commerce Secretary led the Indian side. The
total bilateral trade between India and ROK in 2003- 04
was US $ 3.2 billion with exports to ROK being US $

Smt. Rathi Vinay Jha, Secretary, Department of
Tourism visited ROK from 17-21 April 2004 to
attend 53rd Annual Conference and Board of
Directors Meeting of PATA.
43

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Shri P.I. Suvrathun, Additional Secretary, Ministry
of Personnel visited ROK from 13-19 July 2004 to
attend meetings of IIAS, Council of Administration
and Executive Committee and 26th International
Congress of Administrative Sciences.

in Seoul during the year 2004 was 43,230. During
the period 1-24 January 2005 the number of visas
issued was 4,285.

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
During 2004-05, India and Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea (DPRK) continued to enjoy cordial relations
based on cooperation and mutual benefit. India decided
to supply 1000 MT of rice to DPRK to mark the 30th
anniversary of diplomatic relations between the two
countries, which was formally handed over to DPRK on
29 July 2004. In April 2004, India donated 100,000
injections of Dexamethasone to DPRK as humanitarian
aid.

Dr. L.M. Singhvi, Chairman of the High Level
Committee on Indian Diaspora visited ROK from
23-27 July 2004 to deliver keynote address at an
International Conference.
Shri Justice D.P. Wadhwa, Chairperson, Mr. Vinod
Vaish, Member, Telecom Disputes and Appellate
Tribunal from 6-11 September 2004 and Shri
Pradeep Baijal, Chairman, Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India from 7-11 September 2004 visited
ROK to attend Regional Telecommunication Forum
and Exhibition for the Asia-Pacific Region,
International Telecommunications Union Telecom
Asia– 2004.

India has been providing assistance to DPRK in training
under Ministry’s ITEC programme. From 2004-05, the
ITEC slots have been increased from five to ten. During
the year, the ICCR sponsored a 14-member Bhangra/
Giddha dance group for the 22 April Spring Friendship
Art Festival in Pyongyang. India also participated in the
9th Pyongyang Film Festival of Non-Aligned and Other
Developing Countries held in Pyongyang from 12-20
September 2004. Three Indian feature films were screened
in the Festival.

Justice A.S. Anand, Chairperson, National Human
Rights Commission visited ROK from 11-18
September 2004 to attend the 9th Annual Meeting
of the Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights
Institutions.
Shri Rakesh Kumar, Director General, Indian
Council for Cultural Relations visited ROK from
20-22 September 2004.

A five-member DPRK delegation led by Mr. Hwang Pyong
Jun, Vice Chairman of the Central Committee of the
Korean Buddhists Federation visited India for the
International Conclave on Buddhism and Spiritual
Tourism from 17-19 February 2004.

Shri K.K. Chakbraborty, Member Secretary, Indira
Gandhi National Centre for Arts and DG, National
Museum visited ROK from 29 September – 5
October 2004 to participate in the Triennial 20th
General Conference and 21st General Assembly of
International Council of Museums.

The Embassy of India in Pyongyang issued 96 visas during
the period from 1 April – 31 October 2004.

Mongolia

Shri P.K. Mahanta, Member, Assam Legislative
Assembly visited ROK from 2-5 October 2004 to
attend Summit of World Leaders and World Peace.

The traditionally warm and friendly relations between
India and Mongolia were strengthened during the year.
The two countries continued to implement the
agreements and understandings reached during the visit
of the then Mongolian Prime Minister to India from 1420 January 2004.

Shri S.C. Tripathi, Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum
& Natural Gas visited ROK from 8-9 December
2004 to attend the naming ceremony of LNG Carrier
under construction at Daewoo Ship Building &
Marine Engineering Company, ROK.

The first round of consultations between the National
Security Councils of the two countries took place in New
Delhi from 11-12 October 2004 with the Executive
Secretary of the Mongolian National Security Council,
Dr. Durgerjav Gotov leading a delegation to India.
Similarly, the first ever India-Mongolia joint military
exercises were held in Mongolia from 11-15 October 2004
for which a contingent of Indian military personnel visited
Mongolia.

A delegation led by Dr. Subhash Pani, Chief
Secretary, Government of Orissa visited ROK from
27-31 December 2004 to have discussions in
connection with the proposed integrated steel plant
to be set up by POSCO of ROK in the State of
Orissa.
The total number of visas issued by Embassy of India
44

East Asia

The year also saw the first trade exhibition from India
organised in Ulaanbaatar from 30 August – 3 September
2004 in which several Indian companies participated. To
coincide with the occasion, conferences were organised
in areas such information technology, pharmaceuticals and
biotechnology and Indian cultural performances held.

coincide with India’s Independence Day celebrations on
15 August 2004 in which 250 participants took part.
Mongolia reiterated its support for India’s candidature to
the Permanent Membership of the UN Security Council.
State Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Mr. R
Altangerel in his address at the UN General Assembly
on 27 September 2004 stated that his government
supports the legitimate aspirations of such countries like
India, Japan and Germany which are willing and able to
shoulder greater responsibility in pursuit of international
peace, security and development. Consultations between
the Foreign Offices of the two countries were held in
Ulaanbaatar in April 2004.

A major academic conference on India-Mongolia relations
was held in Ulaanbaatar in May 2004 in which several
eminent Mongolian scholars and scholars from India
participated. The conference highlighted the various
facets of India-Mongolia relations. Another conference
on ‘Indo-Mongolian Literary Links’ was organised at the
National University of Mongolia on 17 January 2005 in
which several eminent scholars from Mongolia presented
papers. Coinciding with this conference, an exhibition of
Indo- Mongolian literary books was held at the Mongolian
State Library.

Measures were taken during the year to implement
cooperation projects in the areas of information
technology, agriculture and culture. India and Mongolia
will complete 50 years of diplomatic relations in December
2005. On 24 December 2004 the two countries launched
celebrations for 50 years of diplomatic relations which
will be undertaken by organisation of various events/
activities through the year.

The activities of the Indian Cultural Centre were
strengthened during the year with the introduction of
classes on yoga and meditation. A marathon race
dedicated to India-Mongolia friendship was organised to

45

4

Eurasia

Russia

in fighting terrorism. India also conveyed its condolences
to the Russian Government over air-crashes involving two
Russian aircrafts on 24 August 2004.

R

elations with the strategic near neighbourhood of
Eurasia continued apace and deepened further during the
year.

India resolutely condemned the terrorist attack in which
a school was seized in Beslan by Chechen terrorists from
1-3 September 2004. This resulted in approximately 350
deaths, including of children. Rastrapatiji and PM sent
messages of condolences to President Putin. PM also held
a telephonic conversation with President Putin on 5
September 2004. External Affairs Minister signed the
condolence book on 6 September 2004 at the Russian
Embassy in Delhi. The Government of India announced
medical assistance in aid of the victims of the Beslan
tragedy through supplies of Indian medicines worth US$
50,000.

Indo-Russian relations are a matter of priority for both
the sides. The year 2004-2005 witnessed a concerted effort
to broaden and step up cooperation.
The 2 nd session of Indo-Russian JWG on Combating
International Terrorism was held in New Delhi on 8 April
2004. It attached special importance to strengthening
bilateral mechanisms, in particular for exchange of
information and sharing of experience in fight against
international terrorism and strengthening cooperation in
curbing the sources of financing of terrorism and the
trafficking in Narcotics.

Mr. V.I. Trubnikov, the First Deputy Foreign Minister of
the Russian Federation was appointed as the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation to India. Shri. Kanwal Sibal,
former Foreign Secretary was appointed as the
Ambassador of India to the Russian Federation.

External Affairs Minister met Foreign Minister of the
Russian Federation Mr. Sergei Lavrov on 22 September
2004 on the sidelines of the 59th UN General Assembly.
They discussed a number of issues of bilateral, regional
and international concern. The Foreign Minister of
Russian Federation Mr. Sergei Lavrov visited India from
8-10 October 2004. During his visit, he called on PM and
held meetings with External Affairs Minister and Raksha
Mantri. The discussions focused on a wide-range of issues
of bilateral, regional and international concern. Both sides
underlined the importance of enhancing trade and
economic cooperation, and agreed to identify and address
all issues that were impeding the full realization of
potential in bilateral relations. Foreign MInister Lavrov
also addressed a business interactive session organized by
CII on 9 October 2004.

India congratulated the Russian Government for the
successful conduct of the Presidential elections in
Chechnya on 29 August 2004. Mr. Alu Alkhanov secured
73.48 per cent of the votes and was declared as the
President of the Chechen Republic. The period under
review witnessed a series of terrorist attacks in Russia. 10
people were killed and 51 injured in a suspected Chechen
terrorist attack in Moscow on 31 August 2004.India
condemned this act of terror and supported Russia’s efforts

The third trilateral meeting between the Foreign Ministers
of India, Russia and China was held on 21 October 2004
at Almaty on the sidelines of the CICA Foreign Ministers’
meeting. The Foreign Ministers exchanged views on issues
of international and regional importance, including the
role of UN in restoration of peace and civilian order in
Iraq and the issue of fight against international terrorism.
They also agreed to explore possibilities of trilateral
economic cooperation.

External Affairs Minister met the Russian Foreign Minister
Mr. Sergei Lavrov on 1 July 2004 in Jakarta. Issues of
regional and international concern, including the situation
in Iraq and Afghanistan, were discussed. Expressing
satisfaction over the current status of India-Russia bilateral
relations, they emphasized the prospects of further
development of economic, scientific and technological
ties. They also discussed intensifying cooperation in the
fields of energy and space.

46

Eurasia

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh meets President Vladimir Putin of Russia, in New Delhi, 3-5 December 2004.

Sprins Season color riod at the Mughal Gardens on the rear Court of Rashtrapati Bhawan.
(Photo: C. M. Bhandari)

47

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

The 10th session of the Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental
Commission on Trade, Economic, Scientific,
Technological and Cultural Cooperation (IRIGC) was
held in New Delhi from 18-19 November 2004. The
Russian side was led by Deputy Prime Minister of the
Russian Federation Mr. Alexander Zhukov and the Indian
side was led by External Affairs Minister Shri. K. Natwar
Singh. Mr. Zhukov called on the President of India and
met the Minister of Finance and the Minister of
Commerce and Industry. Following the meeting, a
Protocol was signed between the two co-chairmen.

include the Joint Declaration signed by the President of
Russian Federation and Prime Minster of India and four
Inter-governmental agreements covering the areas of
Space, Consular and Regional cooperation. The Joint
Declaration emphasizes the strategic partnership between
India and Russia and notes the transformation in the
global environment in the recent past. It stresses the need
for a new international architecture based on a multipolar world. A substantial and new emphasis on economic
relations including the field of energy, IT and banking
has been made. Six MoUs in Banking and Energy sectors
were signed during the visit. In pursuance of the mutual
desire to encourage practical areas of cooperation, the
first Indo-Russian Round Table Seminar on IT was held
in Bangalore on 3-4 December 2004 and the first IndoRussian Seminar on Energy was held in New Delhi on 15
January 2005.

Some of the important decisions taken during the InterGovernmental Commission include, Indian assistance in
the establishment of software parks in Russia, cooperation
between Russian company Sudoimport and Magnum
International Trading for construction of auxiliary fleet
ships in India and the development of the Indo- Russian
Joint Venture Company to produce Titanium Dioxide in
Orissa.

The first meeting of the Indo-Russian Group on draft
Inter-Governmental Agreement on Reciprocal Protection
of Intellectual Rights relating to Military-Technical
Cooperation was held in New Delhi on 18-19 January
2005. The Third Meeting of the India-Russia Joint
Working Group (JWG) on Combating International
Terrorism was held in Moscow on 19-20 January 2005.
Both the sides reiterated that cooperation in combating
international terrorism constitutes an important part of
the strategic partnership between the two countries and
exchanged views on the measures taken by both countries
domestically as well as in the international arena to
strengthen the war against terrorism. In order to give a
practical orientation to the cooperation in this field, both
the sides also agreed for targeted discussion on suppression
of financing of terrorism in the near future.

Both the sides identified Energy, IT, Banking,
Communications, Bio-Technology as new areas of growth.
Special emphasis will be given in expanding cooperation
in thermal, hydro and nuclear energy for power
production. Both the countries also supported
development of cooperation between India and Russia
with the purpose of participation of Indian and Russian
companies in new Oil and Gas fields in Russia and third
countries.
Agreement was also reached to hold the ‘Days of Indian
Culture’ in Russia in September – October 2005 and
develop cultural cooperation within the framework of
Exchange Programme of ‘Days of the cities Moscow and
Delhi’ in 2005-2006.

The Indo-Russian foreign office consultation on Strategic
Stability was held in New Delhi on 27 January 2005. Both
sides exchanged views on issues of disarmament and
prevention of proliferation of WMDs.

With a view to put a sharper focus on issues of mutual
interest it was also decided to reduce the number of
Working Groups and Sub Groups of the InterGovernmental Commission from 23 to 5.

The Indo-Russian Agreement on visa-free travel by the
holders of diplomatic and official passports signed during
President Putin’s visit to India on 3 December 2004 came
into force from 15 February 2005.

The Defence Minister of the Russian Federation Mr. Sergei
Ivanov visited India from 30 November to 1 December
2004 in connection with the 4th session of the IndoRussian Joint Commission on Military-Technical
Cooperation.

CIS
India’s relationship with the countries of the region
received a further boost during this period. High-level
visits were exchanged on a regular basis. These were
complemented by industrial and consumer goods
exhibitions, besides visits of trade delegations. India’s

At the invitation of PM, H.E Mr. Vladimir Putin, President
of the Russian Federation visited India on 3-5 December
2004 for the fifth India-Russia Annual Summit. During
the visit, a total of 11 documents were signed. They
48

Eurasia

Commercial Matters. The Kazakh delegation had
discussions with the Indian side headed by Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice.

economic relations are therefore showing a continuing
positive trend.
Cultural relations and media exchanges have further
broadened the scope of India’s relations with the region.
As part of ‘Festival of India’ programme in three Central
Asian countries, a painting exhibition – ‘Amrita Shergil
revisited’ by contemporary women painters was held in
Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan. A seminar on
India and Central Asia was organized in Tashkent on 16
August 2004. A fashion show showcasing traditions of
Indian jewellery and costumes by royal princes was held
in Tashkent (20-21 August 2004) and in Almaty (25-26
August 2004).

Kazakh poet A. Nilibayev was given the Padma Shri award
by the President of India on 30 June 2004 for his
translation of the Mahabharata into Kazakh language.
Shri E.V.K.S. Elangovan, Minister of State for Commerce
and Industry visited Kazakhstan from 12-14 January 2005.
More than 50 businessmen accompanied the Minister.
The business delegation comprised representatives from
FICCI, CII, EEPC, Pharmaceutical Export Council and
Chemical Export Council. The Minister of State
inaugurated the Kazakh-India Buyer Seller Meet and
addressed the Kazakhstan-India business Forum in Almaty
on 13 January 2005. The business delegation held oneto-one business meetings with Kazakh companies in the
fields of chemicals & allied products, pharmaceuticals,
engineering, textile & IT sector. Minister of State also
held wide-ranging discussions with the prominent business
chambers in Almaty. Two Joint Venture Agreements
between Indian and Kazakh companies in the fields of
construction material and specialized batteries were signed
during the visit.

Kazakhstan
Relations with Kazakhstan continued to be warm and
friendly during the period. Minister of External Affairs
visited Almaty on 21-22 October 2004 to participate in
the CICA Foreign Ministers’ Meeting. During his visit,
Minister of External Affairs called on the President of
Kazakhstan and held meeting with the Foreign Minister
of Kazakhstan. Issues of mutual interest including
cooperation in oil and gas and IT sectors came up for
discussions.

The fifth meeting of the Indo-Kazakh Joint Commission
was held in Astana, Kazakhstan on 17-18 Februray 2005.
The Indian side was led by the Minister of Petroleum and
Natural Gas, Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar and the Kazakh
side was led by Mr. Vladimir Shkolnik, Minister of Energy
and Mineral recourses of Kazakhstan. Shri Mani Shankar
Aiyar also held meetings with the Kazakh Prime Minister,
Mr. Daniel Akhmetov, Minister of Economy and Trade,
Mr. K. Kelimbetov and the Minister of Transport and
Communications, Mr. K. Nagmanov. Discussions focused
on issues of economic and trade relations.

The Kazakh Industry and Trade Minister Mr. Adilbek
Zhaksybekov visited India from 15-18 September 2004.
He was accompanied by a 15-member delegation
representing different Kazakh ministries. The Kazakh
Minister had meetings with Raksha Mantri, Minister of
Commerce and Industry and Minister of Communications
and IT. A MoU on IT cooperation was signed during the
visit. The Kazakh Minister paid a visit to Bangalore to
witness developments in India’s IT sector.
The 3rd meeting of the Indo-Kazakh Joint Business Council
was held in Almaty on 6 September 2004. While FICCI
participated from the Indian side, the Kazakh Chamber
of Commerce & Industry represented Kazakhstan.

Kyrgyzstan
India’s relations with Kyrgyzstan continue to be friendly.
Exchanges at the cultural and business level took place
regularly. The 4th session of Indo-Kyrgyz JBC was held in
Bishkek on 7-8 September 2004. From the Indian side,
FICCI and the Kyrgyz Chamber of Commerce and Industry
from the Kyrgyz side participated in the JBC.

Under the Focus-CIS programme, Engineering Export
promotion Council (EEPC) organized INDIATECH-2004
in Almaty on 3-6 September 2004 in collaboration with
the Kazakh chamber of Commerce& Industry and KITEX
2004 showcasing engineering products from 66 Indian
companies.

In July 2004, a FIEO delegation comprising of Indian
companies having interest in the areas of agro products,
tea, exports of jewellery, gold and diamond mining, cotton
processing, etc. visited Kyrgyzstan and had meetings with
high level officials in the Kyrgyz Government and various
agencies.

A 4-member delegation headed by the Deputy Minister
of Justice of Kazakhstan visited India on 28-30 October
to have discussions on an Agreement between India and
Kazakhstan on Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil and
49

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Tajikistan

Shri E.V.K.S. Elangovan, Minister of State for Commerce
& Industry visited Uzbekistan from 8 to 12 January 2005
as the co-chairman of the 5 th Session of the InterGovernmental Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific and Technological Cooperation between India
and Uzbekistan. The Uzbek Deputy Prime Minister Mr.
Mirabror Usmanov co-chaired the meeting from the
Uzbek side. The Joint Commission Meeting (held in
Tashkent on 11 January) reviewed bilateral cooperation
in trade, economic, scientific and technological fields
between India and Uzbekistan. Areas identified for
cooperation are transportation, construction, information
technology, consultancy, food processing, textiles,
pharmaceuticals, mining, joint ventures, culture and
human resources. A protocol between the two sides was
signed at the end of the meeting.

Indo-Tajik bilateral relations continued to deepen during
the period under review. A delegation comprising of
Secretary (ANA) and Joint Secretary (Eurasia) visited
Tajikistan on 7-9 May 2004. The delegation met Tajik
President, Foreign Minister and Defence Minister. Under
India’s aid programme 10 city transport buses were gifted
to the city of Dushanbe. A US $ 8.37 million grant
extended to Government of Tajikistan was waived off. A
project under India’s aid programme to set up a fruit
processing plant in Dushanbe was completed and handedover to Government of Tajikistan in January 2005.
Colonel General Sherali Khairulloevich Khairulloev,
Defence Minister of Tajikistan visited India from 20-27
January 2005.

Uzbekistan

A Buyer-Seller Meet was jointly inaugurated by the
Minister of State for Commerce & Industry Shri E.V.K.S.
Elangovan and Deputy Prime Minister of Uzbekistan Mr.
Mirabror Usmanov in which Uzbek businessmen and
senior local government officials participated.

Indo-Uzbek relations were marked by traditional warmth
during the period. The Foreign Minister of Uzbekistan
visited India on 29-30 October 2004, during which he
called on the Prime Minister and the Speaker of Lok
Sabha. The Uzbek Foreign Minister had a meeting with
External Affairs Minister. During the visit, a Memorandum
of Understanding on establishing an Indo-Uzbek Centre
for Information Technology was signed.

A Conference of Heads of Indian Missions / Commercial
Representatives of CIS countries was held on 10 January
2005 in Tashkent.

Minister of State for External Affairs Shri E. Ahamed
visited Uzbekistan on 1-4 October 2004 for the Birth
Centenary Celebrations of Late Prime Minister Shri Lal
Bahadur Shastri in Uzbekistan. During his visit, Shri
Ahamed met the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of
Uzbekistan. He visited the Shastri School in Tashkent
and handed over a cheque of US$ 25000 for restoration
and repair of the school. Minister of State for External
Affairs Shri E. Ahamed delivered a speech at the Tashkent
University of World Diplomacy and Economy.

Ukraine

In July 2004, a FIEO delegation comprising of Indian
companies having interest in the areas of silk, cotton
processing, agro products, tea, exports of jewellery, gold
and diamond mining, etc. visited Uzbekistan and had
meetings with high level officials in the Uzbek
Government and various agencies.

EEPC held a Buyer-Seller Meet (BSM) in association with
the Ukrainian Chambers of Commerce and Industry in
Kyiv in June 2004. More than 10 engineering firms were
represented from India in the BSM.

The fourth meeting of the Joint Committee on Science
and Technology between India and Ukraine was held in
New Delhi on 1 April 2004.
An exhibition ‘Enterprise India 2004’ was held by CII in
Kyiv (8-11 July) More than 30 companies representing
small and medium enterprises in the fields of automobile
parts, bicycles, and tools, artificial jewellery and cosmetics,
etc. took part in the exhibition.

Azerbaijan
M/s Infosys Ltd. was awarded a US$ 900,000 contract for
providing banking software in respect of automation of
one of the banks in Azerbaijan.

A 13-member FICCI delegation visited Tashkent on 9-10
September 2004 to participate in the 2nd Joint Business
Council held on 9 September 2004. The delegation met
Deputy Minister of Health, Deputy Chairman of Agency
for Foreign Economic Relations, officials of Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and other commercial organizations.

Dr. Leyla Aliyeva, President of Centre for National and
International Studies in Baku visited India from 22-26
August 2004. During her visit, she delivered a series of
50

Eurasia

Belarus

lectures on Caucasus affairs at JNU, Jamia Milia Islamia
and the Centre for Caucasian Studies, Chandigarh.

Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of State (Independent Charge)
for Science & Technology and Ocean Development led
the Indian delegation to Minsk during the first week of
November 2004 to participate in the 3rd session of the
India-Belarus Joint Committee for Science & Technology
Cooperation. Besides meetings with the Chairman of the
Belarusian State Committee for Science & Technology,
he called on the Prime Minister of Belarus, President of
Belarusian Academy of Sciences and other senior officials
of Belarus. He also addressed an Indo-Belarus Scientific
Seminar and visited a number of leading R&D Institutions
in Minsk.

Armenia
JS (Eurasia) visited Armenia on 3-4 May 2004 for Foreign
Office Consultations. During the visit, JS (Eurasia) met
Armenian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Minister of Science
& Education, Deputy Minister of Finance & Economy,
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Deputy Minister of
Agriculture, Deputy Minister of Culture & Youth Affairs.

Georgia
JS (Eurasia) visited Georgia on 15-17 December 2004.
He held meetings with the Prime Minister of Georgia,
Speaker of the Georgian Parliament, Deputy Minister of
Foreign Affairs and the Deputy Minister of Economic
Development of Georgia. Discussions focused on issues
of mutual concern.

Prime Minister of Belarus Mr. Sergei Sidorski made a
transit stop-over in New Delhi on 7 November 2004
enroute to Vietnam. The Belarusian Prime Minister was
received by Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of State for Science
& Technology and Ocean Development. Shri Sibal was
accompanied by Secretary, DST, JS [Eurasia] and other
Indian officials.

51

5

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Gulf Countries

Abu Dhabi and Dubai (27 & 28 December 2004). In Abu
Dhabi (27 December), the Mnister handed to Sheikh
Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of UAE, an
invitation to visit India from the Hon’ble President and
held detailed discussions with Sheikh Mohammad bin
Zayed Al Nahyan, the Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi and
Sheikh Hamdan bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs on
political, strategic, military and economic cooperation and
regional issues. UAE announced support for India’s
candidature for permanent membership of the UN
Security Council. In Dubai, the Minister held discussions
with Sheikh Mohammad bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Crown
Prince of Dubai and Defence Minister of UAE on
strengthening economic links between India and Dubai.
The Minister also addressed the Conference of Indian
Heads of Missions from 15 countries in the region. Shri
E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
participated in the Heads of Missions Conference and
External Affairs Minister’s meeting with Sheikh
Mohammad bin Rashid Al Maktoum. UAE continues to
be the major destination for Indian exports. India
participated in the IDEXPO-2005. There has been regular
exchange of trade delegations between the two countries,
including participation of major trade exhibitions.

T

he year 2004-2005 has been a period of important
exchange of visits and signing of agreements between India
and the Gulf countries. As far as Gulf Division is
concerned, the year 2004 was hectic particularly due to
major developments in Iraq.

Iraq
India welcomed UN Security Council Resolution 1546 as
a first step in the evolution of political process in Iraq.
Prime Minister sent greetings to the Interim Prime
Minister of Iraq, Iyad Allawi and reiterated India’s
commitment to assist Iraqi people in their rehabilitation
efforts. External Affairs Minister wrote to the Iraqi
counterpart, Hoshiyaar Zibari, welcoming the formation
of the Interim Government and offering to play a role by
India in the reconstruction activities. India was an active
participant in the Iraq Donor Conferences held in
Doha(May 2004), Tokyo(October 2004). India distributed
milk powder worth dollar 1.1 million for Iraqi children
through WFP. The number of training slots for Iraqi
officials under the ITEC programme was increased from
75 to 125 per annum. The number of scholarships for
higher education for Iraqi students was increased from 30
to 50. One of the most challenging and delicate problems
appeared when a militant group in Iraq kidnapped three
Indian truck drivers along with four other foreign nationals
on 21 July 2004. After vigorous efforts, the Government
succeeded in getting the captives released on 2 September.
Later, the Government, as a temporary measure, issued
an advisory against travel of Indian nationals to Iraq. The
emigration control on travel to Iraq was further tightened.
India also offered to train 30 Iraqi election officers in India.

Bahrain
Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Bahrain from 19-21 August 2004 to attend the
World Malayalee Conference.The first round of Foreign
Office Consultations between the Foreign Ministries of
the two countries at Secretary level was held in New Delhi
from 16-19 November 2004. Mr. Abdulnabi Al Sho’ala,
Minister of State in the Office of Prime Minister of Bahrain
led a 25-member delegation of the Society for Training
and Development to India from 22 November to attend
the 33rd International Federation of Training and
Development Organization World Exhibition in New
Delhi. Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister of State for Overseas
Indian Affairs paid an official visit to Bahrain on 24
November 2004 for promotion of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas
held in Mumbai from 7-9 January 2005. Two ships of the

United Arab Emirates
India continues to strengthen its extensive and mutually
beneficial relationship with UAE. President of India, Dr.
A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, accompanied by Minister of State
for External Affairs Shri E. Ahamed, visited UAE on 3
November 2004 to offer condolences to the ruling family
and the UAE leadership. External Affairs Minister visited
52

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Indian Navy – INS Delhi and INS Kulish – made goodwill
visit to Bahrain from 22-26 September 2004. External
Affairs Minister’s scheduled visit to Bahrain on 29
December 2004 had to be postponed due to the
developments in the wake of the Tsunami devastation
which necessitated his presence in India.

the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Heritage and Culture,
Oil & Gas, Defence and Commerce & Industry. Oman
announced its support to India’s candidature for
Permanent Membership of the Security Council. Both the
countries agreed to celebrate the 50th Anniversary of
India’s diplomatic presence in Oman in a befitting manner
in 2005. Commencement of production by the $1 billion
India-Oman Fertilizer Factory in February/March 2005
and associated events were also discussed. An important
outcome of the visit was the signing of the long pending
Extradition Treaty by External Affairs Minister and the
Omani Foreign Minister adding a new dimension to the
security relationship between the two countries. External
Affairs Minister also signed an Agreement on Cooperation
in Audit between the two countries and laid the
foundation stone for the Embassy building.

Doha
Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Qatar from 15-16 September 2004 and met H.E.
Ahmad bin Abdullah Al Mahmoud, Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs, Qatar. Apart from various bilateral,
international and regional issues, he highlighted the new
thrust being given to India’s traditional relations with West
Asia. The 4th World Travel and Tourism Summit held in
Doha from 1-3 May 2004 and Shri N.K. Singh, Member,
Planning Commission and Shri Lalit Suri, MP made a
presentation on India as an international tourist
destination.

Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Oman from 4-7 November 2004 and met the
Ministers Responsible for Foreign Affairs, Heritage &
Culture, Commerce & Industry and the Manpower of
Oman. Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister of State for Overseas
Indian Affairs visited Muscat 28-30 November 2004 for
promotion of the 3rd Pravasi Bharatiya Divas and met the
Manpower Minister of Oman to discuss issues of concern
regarding Indian workers in Oman.

Qatar
Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Qatar from 15-16 September 2004 and held
discussions with Ahmad bin Abdullah Al Mahmoud,
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, on bilateral matters.
Apart from discussions on various bilateral, international
and regional issues, Shri Ahamed highlighted the new
thrust being given to India’s traditional relations with West
Asia. Shri N.K. Singh, Member, Planning Commission and
Shri Lalit Suri, MP visited Qatar for participation in the
4th World Travel and Tourism Summit held in Doha from
1-3 May 2004. Qatar has emerged as a major supplier of
LNG to India. Second Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Energy & Industry of Qatar, H.E. Abdullah
bins Hamad Al-Attiyah, paid an official visit to India from
6 to 9 January 2005. During the visit he attended the
Round Table conference on “Regional Cooperation: Key
to Energy Security” held in New Delhi on 6 January.
Thereafter he paid a two-day visit to Kerala where he
unveiled a model of Petronet’s proposed LNG terminal at
Kochi, which is expected to receive LNG supplies from
Qatar from 2008 onwards.

Shri Rajiv Sikri, Secretary(East) visited Muscat from 1214 February 2005 for the 3rd Session of the Strategic
Consultative Group. He called on Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Commerce & Industry and Oil & Gas. The 50th
anniversary of Indo-Oman diplomatic relations was
formally launched on 13 February 2005 in Muscat, when
letters of greetings and felicitations on the occasion
between the Foreign Ministers of the two countries were
exchanged.
Lt General Ahmed Al Nabhani, Chief of Staff of Oman’s
Armed Forces visited India from 18-23 May 2004. A group
of officers from the National Defence College of India
visited Muscat for a week long study tour.Vice Admiral
Madanjit Singh, Flag Officer Commanding in Chief,
Western Naval Command of India visited Oman from 1215 September 2004. Indian Naval Ships INS Talwar and
INS Pralaya and submarine INS Sindhuraj also visited
Muscat port at the same time.India’s Ocean Research
Vessel, Sagar Kanya, visited Muscat (12-14 September),
as part of a tri-nation Arabian Sea research cruise with
scientists drawn from India, United States of America and
Sultanate of Oman.

Oman
External Affairs Minister visited Muscat (25-26 December
2004). He was received by Sultan Qaboos bin Said to
whom he handed a letter from PM. The discussions with
Sultan dealt with bilateral, regional and international
issues. External Affairs Minister also held discussions with
53

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Mohammad Sabah Al-Salem Al-Sabah visited India from
24-26 August 2004 and met the President, Prime Minister,
External Affairs Minister and the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha. Extradition Treaty, Agreement on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters, MoU for Establishment
of Indo-Kuwait Strategic Consultative Group and GCCIndia Framework Agreement on Economic Cooperation
were signed during the visit. Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister
of State for Overseas Indian Affairs, visited Kuwait from
25-27 November 2004 to promote Pravasi Bhartiya Divas,
2005. Dr. Yousef Hamad Al-Ebraheem, Advisor to Prime
Minister of Kuwait, led the Kuwaiti delegation to the
Round Table Discussion on “Regional Cooperation: Key
to Energy Security “ held in New Delhi on 6 January 2005.

Saudi Arabia
The year witnessed interactions between the two countries
at political and official levels. Minister of State for External
Affairs Shri E. Ahamed visited Jeddah from 13-16 June
2004 and from 9-10 November 2004 in connection with
Haj arrangements. He signed the Agreement for Haj 2005
on 15 June 2004. Under the Agreement, 127,000 Indian
Muslims would perform the Haj 2005. On 13 June he
called on King Fahd and handed a letter from the Prime
Minister of India. Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, Attorney General
of India visited Saudi Arabia from 4-6 April 2004 to
participate in the Symposium on “Judiciary and Laws in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia” organized by the Ministry
of Justice.

Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State visited Kuwait from
21-22 February 2005 and delivered to Prime Minister of
Kuwait an invitation from the Prime Minister to visit India.
Shri Ahamed also called on Foreign Minister and Acting
Speaker of the Kuwaiti Parliament and addressed the
Indian community.

Shri R.M. Abhyankar, Secretary (ANA) accompanied by
JS (Gulf) visited Saudi Arabia from 8-12 April 2004.
During the visit he had extensive consultations with Mr.
Ismail Shoura, Permanent Under Secretary, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs. He also met Dr. Nizar Obeid Madani,
Assistant Foreign Minister and Dr. Ahmed Al-Salem,
Deputy Minister of Interior. The Saudi Minister of
Petroleum and Mineral Resources, Ali Al Naimi visited
India to attend the one-day Minister-level First Round
Table Conference on “Regional Cooperation: Key to
Energy Security” held in New Delhi on 6 January 2005.
India participated in the Counter-Terrorism International
Conference held in Riyadh from 5-8 February 2005. India
was placed as a lead country in Group IV dealing with
defeating and breaking up terrorism organizations and
formations.

Special Kuwait Cell
The Special Kuwait Cell (SKC) was set up in 1991 for
paying compensation to Indian citizens who suffered losses
in life and property during the Gulf War of 1990-91. This
compensation is being paid by the United Nations
Compensation Commission (UNCC), Geneva and the
money comes from the revenue of sale of Iraqi oil under
the “Oil for food programme” set up by the UN Security
Council Resolution 692 (1991) for giving compensation
to victims of Gulf War 1990-91. The disbursement of
compensation money received from UNCC is being done
through four nationalised banks designated for the purpose
i.e. Central Bank of India, Indian Overseas Bank,
Syndicate Bank, Union Bank of India.

The bilateral trade between India and Saudi Arabia
continued to grow at a healthy pace during year 2003-04
and registered an annual increase of 19.41 per cent during
the period. India and Saudi Arabia concluded a Bilateral
Accession Agreement on Saudi Arabia’s accession to the
WTO on 16 June 2004 in Geneva. The Agreement
included agreed tariff schedules on items of export interest
for India in the Saudi Arabian market as well as Saudi
Arabia’s market access commitments in services sectors
of interest to India. In order to enhance the interaction
in the cultural sphere, a 10-member percussion troupe
led by Keshab Chowdhury, sponsored by ICCR visited
Saudi Arabia from 27-31 May 2004 and performed both
in Riyadh and Jeddah. A 24-Hour Helpline for the Indian
expatriate community in Saudi Arabia was established in
Indian Mission in Riyadh.

The scrutiny of claim applications and deciding the
quantum of payment in each case and the timing of the
payment (or to reject a claim altogether) lies totally in
the domain of UNCC. Under Article 40(4) of the
Provisional Rules for Claims Procedure adopted by the
UNCC Governing Council, the decisions of UNCC are
final and not subject to review or appeal on substantive,
procedural or any other grounds.
Between 1 April 2004 and 15 January 2005 the UNCC
has transferred US$ 14,141,354.01 for approximately
1,350 claims in the individual claims category. The money
received in the previous year which remained undisbursed
for various reasons, continued to be distributed during

Kuwait
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kuwait Sheikh (Dr.)
54

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

performed Haj in 2005 including 80,772 under the
arrangements made by the Haj Committee and the rest
through Private Tour Operators.

this period. A total of US$ 14,632,823.71 was disbursed
to 1,635 claimants by the four designated banks. The
break-up is given below:
Category

No. of Claims

Amount Paid (US $)

A

924

240,551.21

B

Nil

Nil

C

631

2,527,660.94

D

76

11,864,611.56

1,635

14,632,823.71

Total

The Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri E. Ahamed,
visited Saudi Arabia from 13-16 June 2004 at the
invitation of the Saudi Haj Minister Mr. Iyad bin Amin
Madani and signed the Agreement for Haj-2005. The
Minster of State for External Affairs also called on the
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques King Fahd ibn Abdel
Aziz in Jeddah on 13 June 2004 and handed over a letter
from Prime Minister of India.
Shri K. Natwar Singh, External Affairs Minister
inaugurated All India Annual Haj Conference in New
Delhi on 27 October 2004. The Conference, which was
held after a gap of two years, was attended by members of
Central and State Haj Committees, Members of
Parliament, religious scholars and Government officials.
The Conference was also significant as it was the first
annual Haj Conference to take place after the new Haj
Committee Act has come into force and the new Haj
Committee was constituted.

Yemen
Foreign Office Consultations between the two countries
were held in New Delhi from 3 to 5 January 2005. The
leader of the Yemeni delegation Mr. Hussein Taher Bin
Yahya, Secretary of Foreign Affairs for Arab, African and
Asian Affairs held discussions with Shri Rajiv Sikri,
Secretary(East) on a wide range of bilateral issues and
reviewed regional and international developments. He
called on Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External
Affairs and delivered a letter from the Yemeni Foreign
Minister addressed to External Affairs Minister to visit
Yemen. The 5th Session of the Indo-Yemen Joint
Committee for Economic, Scientific and Technical
Cooperation was held in Sana’a from 15 to 17 January
2005. Shri Rajiv Sikri, Secretary (East) led the Indian
delegation. Discussions dealt with Economic Cooperation,
Commerce, Investment, Energy, Consular Matters,
Culture, Education, Tourism, Health and Technical &
Scientific Cooperation. Shri Sikri called on the Foreign
Minister and delivered a letter from External Affairs
Minister. He also met Minister of Commerce & Industry
and Prime Minister of Yemen.

Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs,
visited Saudi Arabia from 8-11 November 2004 to review
the ongoing arrangements for Haj 2005. During the visit,
he met with Mr. Iyad Bin Amin Madani, Saudi Minister
of Haj, Mr. Eissa Rawais, Saudi Deputy Minister for Umrah
Affairs and Mr. Adnan Katib, Chairman of the South
Asian Moassassah - the Saudi agency responsible for
making logistical arrangements for Indian pilgrims - and
discussed with them the various arrangements being put
in place for Indian pilgrims for Haj 2005. Minister of State
for External Affairs and Secretary(East) visited Saudi
Arabia in December 2004 and reviewed arrangements for
Haj 2005.

Haj

For Haj 2005, three new embarkation points viz.
Aurangabad, Guwahati and Patna (in place of Gaya) were
added during Haj 2005 thus bringing the total number of
embarkation points to 15. For the first time, nearly 21,000
pilgrims flew directly to Madinah from three embarkation
points in India i.e. Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Calicut.

Significant changes for Haj arrangements during the year
included the Government’s decision on 20 October 2004
to increase the number of Haj pilgrims going through the
Haj Committee of India from 72,000 to 82,000 and to
remove the restrictions introduced during Haj 2004
restoring status quo ante for availing of subsidized airfares
for Haj 2005. A total of about 127,000 pilgrims from India

Information Technology was utilized increasingly to
monitor and track pilgrims’ location and movement.
Three Internet Cafes were provided for exclusive use of
Hajis in Makkah. In Makkah, all 9-branch offices apart
from the main office had computerized databases which
provided immediate information about the places of stay
and arrival/departure schedule of every pilgrim. The

Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Yemen from 19-20 February and held discussions
with the Foreign Minister and called on Prime Minister
and the President.

55

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

number of deputationists from Central and State
Government to Saudi Arabia for assisting the Haj pilgrims
was increased by 15%.

availed of 5 slots under ITEC and 4 additional slots are
expected to be utilized in the CFY. The Chief of Air Staff,
Algerian Air Force visited India from 20-26 February 2005.

A 34-member Indian Haj Goodwill delegation led by Shri
Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister for Parliamentary Affairs
and Urban Development, visited Saudi Arabia from 16
January to 3 February 2005. During the visit, the Leader
of the Indian Delegation met with the Custodian of the
Two Holy Mosques, His Majesty King Fahd ibn Abdel
Aziz and the Saudi Haj Minister.

Djibouti
Indo-Djibouti bilateral relations continued to be warm
and friendly during the year. The Government of Djibouti
is keen in enhancing its relations with India and has
decided to open an Embassy in New Delhi and has
designated its Ambassador to India. Djibouti has also
decided to open a consulate in Mumbai and nominated
Mr. Idriss Sababn as its Consul General.

The Ministry continued the system of registration of
Private Tour Operators, which had commenced from Haj
2003 onwards, for Haj 2005 as well with a view to ensuring
better services by private tour operators for the pilgrims.

Djibouti continued to support India’s candidature for
various posts in the international organizations. ITEC slots
for Djibouti have been increased from 2 in 2003- 2004 to
10 for the year 2004-2005.

India – GCC
The India-GCC Political Dialogue, attended by the GCC
Foreign Ministers and External Affairs Minister took place
on the sidelines of UNGA in New York on 27 September
2004. India and GCC signed a Framework Agreement for
Economic Cooperation at New Delhi on 25 August 2004.
GCC Secretary-General visited New Delhi for the
purpose. The GCC-India agreement was signed by Dr.
Muhammad Sabah Al Salem Al Sabah, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait and Mr. Abdul Rahman bin
Hamad Al Attiyah, Secretary General of the Cooperation
Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC) with Shri
Kamal Nath, Minister of Commerce and Industry. The
GCC Secretary General also held discussions with
External Affairs Minister Shri Natwar Singh and Tourism
Minister Smt. Renuka Choudhary during the visit. The
first official-level meeting between India and GCC under
the Framework Agreement for the Economic Cooperation
was held in New Delhi on 19 November 2004.

Egypt
Bilateral relations remained friendly. During the current
year there were two Ministerial visits from Egypt. Egyptian
Minister of Investment, Dr. Mahmoud Mohie EI Din
participated for the first time in the India Economic
Summit in New Delhi in December 2004 to woo Indian
investors. Likewise, Egyptian Minister of Tourism, Mr.
Ahmed Al-Maghraby launched a road show in India in
December to attract more Indian tourists, whose numbers
have been growing at over 30 per cent annually (around
45,000 in 2004).
Egypt remained one of the important commercial and
economic partners of India in the WANA region during
2004. For the first time, investments were made in the
Egyptian hydrocarbon sector with the Gas Authority of
India Ltd. (GAIL) picking up small equity and
management stakes, in two gas distribution projects in
Cairo and Al Fayum. GAIL also acquired a 15 per cent
equity share in NATGAS, a new Egyptian company. With
Egypt likely to emerge among the top 10 producers and
exporters of gas, our efforts to deepen meaningful
cooperation have increased. Indian Minister of Petroleum
flagged our interest in partnering with Egypt in establishing
a new product pipeline from Mediterranean to the Red
Sea. We continue to buy limited amounts of crude oil and
petroleum products from Egypt, valued at nearly US $
350 million annually. HDFC assisted in setting up Egypt
Housing Development Corporation (EHDC) by taking
up 10 per cent equity share and providing technical
assistance. Former UNSG Boutros Ghali opened the South
Centre Meetings in India in February 2005.

WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
Algeria
Relations with Algeria continued to be warm and close.
Exploratory visits at official and businessmen level were
undertaken to promote economic and commercial
relations. The 1st meeting of the Joint Committee set up
in the field of Small and Medium Enterprises was held
from 21-26 November 2004 in New Delhi. A four-member
delegation from ONGC (Videsh) Limited visited Algeria
from 5-8 December 2004 to study technical data of the
blocks for oil/gas exploration being offered by the Algerian
authorities under the Sixth Licensing Round. Algeria has
56

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Israel

state solution, that it does not involve a transfer of
settlement activity to the West Bank, that there is an
organized and negotiated handover of responsibility to
the Palestinian Authority, and that Israel facilitates
rehabilitation and reconstruction in Gaza. The proposed
withdrawal should be properly coordinated with the
international community so as to ensure that an orderly
situation in Gaza results, which would permit the
maintenance of security as well as rehabilitation and
reconstruction”. India reaffirmed that “a just, peaceful and
lasting solution to the Middle East conflict can only be
achieved through political negotiations between the
parties with the active support of the international
community. Such a comprehensive solution must also
include Syria and Lebanon”. In July 2004, India voted in
favour of the UNGA resolution calling on Israel to comply
with the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) on the West Bank “Separation fence” that
the construction of the separation fence by Israel was
contrary to international law.

Bilateral relations with Israel continued to develop in
diverse areas. Vice Prime Minister and Minister for
Industry, Trade and Labour Ehud Olmert visited India
from 6-9 December 2004. During the visit, he met with
External Affairs Minister, Commerce and Industry
Minister, Finance Minister, Communication and
Information Technology Minister, Agriculture Minister
and Minister of State for Science & Technology. A Letter
of Intent for early finalization and signing of MoU on
Industrial Research and Development Initiative between
India and Israel was signed. Comptroller and Auditor
General, Chief of Air Staff and Chairman of ISRO were
the visitors from Indian side to Israel during the financial
year 2004-05. The 8th round of India-Israel Foreign Office
Consultations were held in New Delhi on 16 November
2004, during which progress on the entire gamut of
bilateral relations was reviewed. The Israeli delegation
called on the External Affairs Minister. The India-Israel
Joint Working Group (JWG) on Counter-Terrorism held
its fourth meeting in India from 30 November – 2
December 2004, back-to-back with the first round of
bilateral consultations on disarmament issues. The IndiaIsrael agreement on visa-free travel for diplomatic and
official passport holders came into effect from 20 October
2004.

Commerce Secretary visited Israel on 13-14 February 2005
to co-chair a meeting of the India-Israel Joint Study Group
on a proposed bilateral Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation Agreement.

Jordan
India and Jordan continued to have cordial and friendly
relations during the period. Minister of State for External
Affairs Shri E. Ahamed visited Jordan from 16-18 June
2004. He called on the Regent Prince Faisal and discussed
bilateral relations and highlighted the policy of the new
Congress-led Government to give a new thrust to India’s
relations with Arab countries. The Minister also handed
over an invitation from President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam to
King Abdullah to visit India at an early date. Minister of
Labour Amjad Majali paid an official visit to India from
27 September to 1 October 2004. During talks with his
counterpart Shri Sis Ram Ola, Mr. Majali stressed the
Kingdom’s desire to benefit from Indian experience in the
field of Labour, Vocational Training and Social Insurance.
A joint invitation from the Chairman of Rajya Sabha and
Speaker of Lok Sabha has been extended to H.E. Mr.
Abdulhadi Majali, Speaker (President) of the House of
Deputies to visit India along with a Jordanian
parliamentary delegation.

Between January-October 2004, according to Israeli trade
statistics, bilateral trade crossed US$ 2.144 billion, a
growth of over 25 per cent compared to the same period
in 2003. It was higher than the record trade in full 2003.
The sixth meeting of the India-Israel Joint Committee on
Science and Technology was held in Israel in July 2004.
Both sides inter alia agreed to pursue joint projects
particularly in the areas of nano-technology,
biotechnology and advanced materials. The third meeting
of the India-Israel Joint Working Group on Defense
Cooperation was held in Israel from 21-23 December
2004. It was co-chaired by Defense Secretary from the
Indian side and the Director General of the Ministry of
Defense Amos Yaron from the Israeli side.
On the Israeli “Disengagement plan”, the India-EU Joint
Statement of 8 November 2004 stated that “Israeli
intention to withdraw from all Gaza settlements and parts
of the West Bank can constitute a step towards achieving
the two State solution and had the possibility of restarting
progress on the roadmap, provided that it takes place in
accordance with the relevant UNSC resolutions and in
the context of the roadmap, that it is a step towards a two

Over the years, the trade between the two countries has
grown rapidly. Although the balance of trade has been in
favour of Jordan, during the last few years, Indian exports
57

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

have also shown encouraging progress. Last year, India
exported to Jordan JD141 million worth of goods including
spices, tea, sesame, meat and motor vehicles and spare
parts. According to latest figures, Indian imports from
Jordan during January-August 2004 was US $ 144 million
while, Indian exports to Jordan was US $ 101 during the
same period.

million). This is in comparison with previous year’s exports
(2003-04) which stood at Rs. 86.60 Crores (18.73 $
million).
Minister of State (C&I) Shri E.V.K.S. Elangovan visited
Libya to take part in 9th Session of Indo-Libya Joint
Commission (ILJC) from 20-22 November 2004. The
major sectors discussed during the visit included
hydrocarbon, power, shipping, civil aviation,
telecommunication, education, healthcare and
investment. Apart from Joint Commission discussions,
Minister of State (C&I) also took opportunity to call on
Prime Minister, Minister for Economy & Trade, Energy
Minister, Minister for Manpower, Training & Employment
and a host of other dignitaries. Two composite delegations
in Hydrocarbon and Power sector visited Libya from 1115 June 2004. Two delegations from Federation of Indian
Chamber of Commerce & Industries (FICCI) and Indian
Electrical & Electronics Manufacturers Association
(IEEMA) visited Libya in the month of July 2004.

Lebanon
Bilateral relations with Lebanon continued to be cordial
and friendly. A French Major General Alain Pellegrini
took over charge in February 2004 from Major General
Lalit Mohan Tewari of Madras Regiment who served as
Force Commander of UNIFIL for the period 2001-2003.
The 6th Battalion of the Indian Armed Forces i.e. 10th
Garhwal completed its tenure in October 2004 and was
replaced by 15 Assam Regiment.
There was some improvement in Indo-Lebanese economic
relations with the visit of some Indian business delegations
which included delegation from Gem & Jewellery Export
Promotion Council in February 2004, delegation from the
National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd. (NTPC) in
October 2004 and a delegation from Gas Authority of
India Limited (GAIL) in November 2004.

On political front point, Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister
for Parliamentary Affairs & Urban Development visited
Tripoli from 27-29 November 2004. During his stay, the
Minister (PA & UD) met with Mr. Shahoumi, Chairman
(Foreign Affairs Committee) of the General Peoples
Congress (Parliament), FM Shalgam, Minister for
Manpower and Training Mr. Matoug Mohammed Matoug.
The visiting Minister also called on the Libyan leader Col.
Gaddafi.

Libya
Bilateral relations in the economic and commercial fields
made significant progress during the current year. Lifting
of UN, US and EU sanctions present greater opportunities
and increased competition from other countries to Indian
companies. Hydrocarbon and Power sector, along with
Pharmaceuticals, Automobiles, Software and IT education
are the focus areas which have tremendous potential for
our companies. Indian companies are executing $ 600
million worth of projects currently. In the power sector,
BHEL is currently executing Rs 1200 crore contract for
setting up a 600 MW power plant. ONGC already has a
presence in Libya. In the new Exploration and Production
Sharing Agreement Round (EPSA-IV) of National Oil
Corporation, Libya, a total of 15 oil blocks were offered
and IOC won a block in January 2005 in the present
round.

Morocco
Relations between India and Morocco continued to grow
and strengthen in all areas culminating in Moroccan Prime
Minister Driss Jettou’s visit to India from 6-9 December
2004. He was accompanied by a large delegation, which
included 7 Ministers, 25 high-ranking officials and 20
representatives of the media and 20 businessmen. Mr.
Jettou met our President, Prime Minister and External
Affairs Minister. During the visit, Agreements were signed
between the two countries in the areas of Energy and
Power, Civil Aviation and Agricultural Research. The
third meeting of the Indo-Morocco Joint Economic
Council, comprising businessmen from both sides was also
held on the sidelines. The visit of the Prime Minister and
his high-level delegation could serve as the launching pad
for an even closer relationship. A 14-member Indian
delegation representing various sectors of industry and
commerce participated in the 35th World Congress of
International Chamber of Commerce at Marrakech in
June 2004.

National Supply Corporation lifted the ban on Indian
commodities in the month of July 2004. The ban was in
place since 2000. The trade figures are expected to go up
manifold during the current year. As per available trade
figures, Indian exports for the initial two months (AprilMay) stood at Rs 48.11 Crores (Approximately US $ 10.7
58

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

“The Summit in Sharm-el Sheikh on 8 February 2005
and the significant meeting between the leaders of Israel
and Palestine after a gap of about four years is an important
step in the resumption of the Israel-Palestine peace process
and deserves the support of the international community.
We have noted the encouraging statements of both
leaders. However, a number of important issues remain
to be addressed. India has consistently urged an end to
violence from all sides. We look forward to further progress
in the peace process that would bring about a just and
peaceful solution within a reasonable time frame, leading
to a sovereign, independent State of Palestine with welldefined and secured borders, living at peace with the State
of Israel”.

At the invitation of Speaker of Lok Sabha and the
Chairman of the Rajya Sabha to the leaders of both the
Houses of Moroccan Parliament, Mr. Abdelouahed Radi,
Speaker of the Moroccan House of Representatives
(Lower House) is expected to lead a 5-memebr
Parliamentary delegation to New Delhi later this year.

Palestine
Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Palestine from 17-19 September 2004. His visit
allowed for an appreciation of the ground situation and
for talks with late President Arafat and other Palestinian
leadership. During the visit, Minister of State for External
Affairs formally handed over medicines and TATA Safari
vehicles worth Rs. 2 crore as donation to the Palestinian
National Authority. A special course for 10 Palestinian
diplomats has been organized by Foreign Service Institute
of the Ministry from 22 November to 17 December 2004.

Sudan
The year 2004-05 witnessed a substantial activity in the
field of bilateral economic & commercial relations. A
“Technical Agreement” for setting up solar photovoltaic
(SPV) module manufacturing plant, near Khartoum in
Sudan between Central Electronics Limited (CEL), India
and the Sudanese Ministry of Science & Technology was
signed in June 2004. In July 2004 Telecommunications
Consultants of India Limited (TCIL) prepared a feasibility
study for “Sudan Electronic City.” ONGC Videsh Ltd
(OVL) has, in addition to its 25 per cent stakes in the
Greater Nile Petroleum Operating Company (GNPOC),
acquired 26 per cent and 24.5 per cent stakes in Blocks
5A and 5B respectively from OMV of Austria at a total
cost of US$ 115 million in May 2004. Apart from OVL’s
stakes in Sudanese oil blocks, OVL was awarded the
project for construction of products pipeline from
Khartoum Refinery to Port Sudan on 1 July 2004. India is
also negotiating for upgrading of a refinery in Port Sudan.
In response to the Sudanese government’s request for
India’s help for the people in Darfur, GOI granted 20,000
tons of wheat as humanitarian assistance for the people
of Darfur. Sudan is a major beneficiary under the ITEC
Programme and it has been allocated 60 slots during 200405.

Following the death of President Arafat on 11 November
2004 India stated that he “was a towering and highly
respected international personality who fought selflessly
and courageously, at great personal sacrifice, for the
Palestinian cause and an independent homeland for the
Palestinian people, to which he dedicated his whole life.
He enjoyed great respect and admiration among the
people and leaders of India, and will always be remembered
as a sincere and steadfast friend of India.”. External Affairs
Minister led a multi-party delegation to Cairo for the
funeral ceremony of President Arafat. Condolence
messages were sent from President, PM and External
Affairs Minister to their counterparts in the Palestinian
National Authority. Parliament adopted a long obituary
honouring President Arafat.
After the sad demise of President Arafat, India’s
commitment to the Palestinian cause was reaffirmed in
PM’s message issued on 29 November 2004 on the
occasion of the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian people.
As a mark of support to the cause of democracy in
Palestine and as the world’s largest democracy, India sent,
at the invitation of the Palestinian National Authority, a
team of Election Observers to observe the Palestinian
residential elections in January 2005. India welcomed Mr
Mahmoud Abbas as the new President of the Palestinian
National Authority. India welcomed the resumption of
the Israel-Palestine peace process and issued a statement
on 10 February 2005 which stated:

At the invitation of Honourable Home Minister, Sudan’s
Minister of Interior, H.E. Maj-Gen (Eng.) Abdul Rahim
Mohamed Hussein visited India from 24-29 January 2005.
Secretary General of Sudanese Ministry of Energy and
Mining, H.E. Dr. Omer Mohamad Khair, visited Delhi to
attend Petrotech between 15 and 19 January 2005. The
fourth round of FOCs between India and Sudan were held
on 10 February 2005 at New Delhi.
59

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Syria

the the credit line of 25 million US$ which was announced
by the former Prime Minister last year. The India-Syria
Joint Hydrocarbon committee meeting was held in New
Delhi on 14 February 2005.

Bilateral relations further strengthened during the year
building on the Prime Minister’s visit in November 2003.
President Assad in principle accepted an invitation to visit
India.

Tunisia

The first meeting of the Joint Working Group on the Small
and Medium Sector was held in New Delhi in November.
Bilateral trade (highly skewed in India’s favour), recorded
steady growth and stood at 205 Million US$ in 2003-04
showing a growth of 66 per cent over 2002-03. A number
of Indian companies participated in various Government
tenders. ONGC (Videsh) along with an American
Company IPR signed an exploration contract with the
Syrian Government for exploration and development of
oil in Block No.24 in northeastern part of Syria. ABB
India bagged another contract worth 30 million US$ in
December 2004 for supply of substation. A team from
DMRC (Delhi Metro Rail Corporation) led by its MD.

Bilateral relations between India and Tunisia remained
cordial during this period. Tunisia has been supportive of
India’s candidatures in various international fora.
Prospects of bilateral business have been explored and
are beginning to fructify with major Tunisian investment
in fertilizer sector in India and substantial increase in
Indian trade to Tunisia. A Six Member delegation of
Indian Electrical & Electronics Manufacturers Association
(IEEMA) visited Tunisia and held fruitful discussions with
their Tunisian counterparts. There is great scope for Indian
supply in telecommunications industries. The second
meeting of the Indo -Tunisian JWG on Drugs &
Pharmaceuticals was held in Tunisia in 2005 and will
further consolidate Indian exports of medicines and allied
items to Tunisia and the region.

Shri E. Sreedharan visited Syria for a feasibility study of
Metro project in Damascus which will be funded from

60

Africa (South of Sahara)

East and Southern Africa

6

mention here the credit line of US$200 million extended
to NEPAD. Recently India extended credit lines to
Mozambique, Kenya, Lesotho, Senegal, Angola, etc.
Earlier it was decided to provide eight countries of West
Africa with a credit line of 500 million dollars and this is
generally known as the TEAM-9 Initiative. A high-level
meeting of representatives of these countries (which
included four Foreign Ministers) was recently held in India
to further discuss the modalities of utilization of this credit
line.

I

ndia’s relations with the African countries have
strengthened during the year. African States remember
with gratitude the assistance extended by India to them
during their struggle against colonialism and apartheid.
During recent years, India’s ties with these countries have
much expanded in economic and commercial arenas.
India has sizeable two-way trade with most of the African
countries. There is recognition that Indian goods, whether
consumer or capital, are amongst the best in the world
and price-wise unbeatable. There is immense appreciation
and admiration for the Indian technology. It is widely felt
that India can be of great help to the African continent
as it marches towards progress and development.

The highlights of India’s cooperation with Africa include
building an International Convention Centre in Mauritius
at a cost of US$15 million. Half of this amount will be
paid as grant while the other half is in the form of credits.
Recently construction of the Cybercity was completed
there and this was entirely financed through Indian credit
line. There are a number of other projects under
consideration for which suitable credit lines will be
provided to Mauritius. India is assisting Mauritius in
several areas and its excellent economic and political ties
are underpinned by close people-to-people contacts. It
may be noted that no less than 58 per cent of the
Mauritian population is of Indian origin.

Reflecting the closeness of relations between India and
Africa, President of Zanzibar visited India in March.
President of Nigeria paid a brief visit to India in November
2004. India’s Vice President visited South Africa to
participate in their 10th Freedom Day in the last week of
April. Foreign Ministers of Comoros, Lesotho, Mauritius,
Senegal and Burkina Faso had visited India during the
last 2-3 months.

India is cooperating closely with South Africa, both
bilaterally as well as within the framework of IBSA
dialogue. The IBSA is looked upon as a model of
cooperation in the developing world and has evoked much
interest and admiration among other countries. India is
also considering joint ventures with South Africa in other
African countries in the field of mineral extraction, oil/
gas exploration, etc. A joint forum between captains of
industry belonging to India and South Africa was formed
recently. It is headed by Mr. Ratan Tata, from Indian side
while on the South African side it is headed by Mr. Patrice
Motsepe, who is the head of a big corporation in that
country. It is hoped that the formation of this forum will
lead to increase in economic interaction between India
and South Africa and especially would encourage
formation of joint ventures in key areas. There are thus
excellent prospects for expansion of our bilateral ties with
South Africa in economic and commercial arenas.

Indian President paid a visit to Tanzania and South Africa
in September 2004. During his visit the President had
the rare honour of addressing the Pan-African Parliament.
He was the first non-African Head of State to do so. Smt.
Sonia Gandhi, President of the Congress Party, visited
Mauritius during the last week of November 2004. PM is
scheduled to visit Mauritius shortly.
It would be evident from this exchange of visits at the
highest level between India and Africa that both the sides
are extremely keen to further build and strengthen the
relationship between them. It is a testimony to the fact
that both India and Africa well realize that they have much
to offer to each other and are natural partners in their
common struggle against backwardness and poverty.
During the last year a number of credit lines have been
extended to the countries of this region. One may specially
61

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Special mention must be made about the announcement
made by Indian President during his recent visit to South
Africa. President declared that India would provide
technical assistance and expertise for establishing a fiber
optic and electronic connectivity between all the countries
of Africa. This is a highly ambitious project and would
enable the African states to adopt modern technologies
and methods of communication. It is hoped that such a
linkage would give a major boost to the development of
Africa in the fields of education, health, etc. and they
would be able to implement schemes based on e-medicine,
e-governance, e-education, etc.

selected for the courses being offered under its aegis.
Keeping in view the overriding need for Africa for trained
manpower the Government of India has over the years
greatly expanded the scope of the ITEC and the number
of seats allotted to Africa has shown a steady increase
over the years.
Mention must be made here of the sterling role played by
India’s defence forces while participating in peacekeeping
operations in various countries of Africa such as Burundi,
Ivory Coast, DRC, etc. which had been suffering from
civil war, ethnic violence, etc. A large contingent from
the Indian army forms part of the UN Force, which is
keeping peace between Eritrea and Ethiopia. The present
commander of this force (UNMEE – United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea) is a senior army officer
from India. African countries highly appreciate the vital
contribution, which India is thus making to restoration
of stability and peace in various parts of this continent.
Indian defence personnel participating in these operations
have everywhere distinguished themselves by the
professionalism as well as by their humane approach, thus
demonstrating to the common man in Africa that India
is genuinely concerned about the problems being faced
by the people of Africa.

There is no doubt that the relations between India and
Africa are at a major turning point now. There is a
widespread feeling in Africa that it was India which stood
by them while they were struggling to secure their
independence and it is India again which is standing by
them as they are now engaged in a new struggle against
the legacy of the colonial era represented by poverty,
backwardness and lack of infrastructure. Perhaps what
Africa feels for India can best be expressed with a quote
from a speech recently made by the Prime Minister of
Mauritius in their Parliament.
“I also think that we are blessed. We will never stop saying
‘thank you’ to India. In every difficult situation, India is
there. We want to get the ICT sector off the ground, India
is there! We have a problem to host a huge UN Conference
on AIDS, India is there! And here, when we want to take
a further step in consolidating, modernizing democracy,
once again, India is there. We are benefiting from this
accumulated experience in the largest democracy in the
world – India. That is why I say that we are not just
chanceux; we are blessed. What sign of maturity, what
lesson in democracy this huge subcontinent India has just
given. For the first time, electronic voting machines were
used for a general election in one go across this huge
subcontinent. And surprise, those who thought they
would win, lost! Mr. Speaker, Sir, again, this is a sign of
maturity! Not the slightest challenge! Fantastic! They
have devised a superb piece of electronic machinery; they
have used it and there is not the slightest challenge. What
a lesson! And we stand to benefit from all this, Mr.
Speaker, Sir.”

There is universal recognition in Africa that India has
now become a major power in every sense of the word.
This is why most countries of Africa have enthusiastically
endorsed India’s candidature for a permanent seat in the
UN Security Council. Indian communities in various
African countries have, in recent years, proved themselves
as a valuable bridge strengthening the relationship
between India and their countries of residence. These
communities mostly consist of PIOs whose greatgrandfathers had migrated to Africa from India in the 19th
century. In most African countries, members of the Indian
community are generally engaged in trade and they usually
account for a large percentage of the retail trade in the
country concerned. The earlier image of a greedy and
rapacious Indian trader who exploited the local people
and reaped huge profits has now almost become a thing
of the past. It also needs to be noted that members of the
Indian community in Africa have started to invest in local
industries and they thus have been proving that their links
and attachment first and foremost is with the country of
their residence in Africa. It is also gratifying that many
members of the Indian community have become members
of Parliament in different African States. One can safely
say that the Indian Diaspora in Africa has finally come of

In the field of manpower training under ITEC and similar
schemes, India has been providing training in a wide range
of fields to countries of Africa since the early 1960s. It is
a tribute to the high quality of training, which is imparted
under the ITEC that there is much competition to be
62

Africa (South of Sahara)

Affairs Minister. During his visit, the first ever bilateral,
high-level visit from either side, India and Comoros agreed
on strengthening cooperation in a wide variety of fields.
At the 59th session of the UNGA Comoros supported
India’s candidature for permanent membership of the
Security Council and for ECOSOC.

age and while retaining their Indian culture and identity
have managed to merge themselves with the mainstream
society in Africa in the most harmonious manner.
India looks to the future and there is no doubt that
immense opportunities for cooperation exist between India
and Africa. Indian technology and capital aided by its
skilled manpower are best suited to enable Africa to
exploit its natural resources in a manner mutually
beneficial both to the people of India as well as of Africa.
A brief account of developments in these countries is as
follows:

Eritrea
No high level visit took place during the period under
reference. However, when Ambassador met President and
several Cabinet Ministers, they impressed upon the urgent
need of opening a Diplomatic representation at the
earliest. Around 1500 Indian Teachers/Doctors/ Experts
are working in Eritrea in different Departments/Sectors.
Indian contingent comprising 1400 defence personnel is
the largest component of United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea(UNMEE). Action is being taken to
appoint an Hony. Consul General in Eritrea.

Botswana
Deep cordiality and mutual benefit mark the bilateral
relations between India and Botswana during the year.
Botswana extended support on a number of issues and
voted for India at international elections, and cooperated
with India on a wide range of issues. A delegation of top
officials of the Botswana Export Development and
Investment Authority (BEDIA) visited India to seek new
investors in May 2004. Chairman & Managing Director
of Telecommunication Consultants India Ltd.(TCIL), Shri
G.D. Gaiha, visited Botswana in July 2004. He met
Minister of Science, Communications and Technology
Boyce Sebetela and senior officials in the Ministry as well
as those of Botswana Telecommunications Corporation
(BTC) and postal department. A group of eleven Indian
businessmen including representatives of M/s. Larsen &
Toubro (Kolkata) and Tata Infotech, visited Botswana in
July 2004 at the invitation of Botswana Export
Development and Investment Authority (BEDIA). A 9member delegation sponsored by EEPC visited Botswana
in August 2004 and discussed export prospects. Lt.Gen.
L.M. Fisher, Commander of Botswana Defence
Force(BDF) visited India in August 2004 at the personal
invitation of Gen. N.C. Vij, Chief of Army Staff. According
to the Botswana Export Development and Investment
Authority, India was the largest investor in Botswana with
31 per cent of all investments since 2002. India’s export
to Botswana also increased by 54 per cent during the year.

Ethiopia
India and Ethiopia continued to enjoy warm and friendly
relations during the period and it was further strengthened
especially in the areas of capacity building and human
resource development. This has been acknowledged by
the Government of Ethiopia in its annual performance
report, which says that a good result has been achieved
in the training of health extension workers and this has
been possible because of training the trainers by using the
services of professionals form India. The India and
Ethiopia bilateral trade also continued to increase.
However, the balance of trade remained heavily in favour
of India. Ethiopia has also supported India’s candidature
for various posts in International Organizations. India also
continued to contribute peacekeeping troops to the
United Nations Mission for Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE). No VVIP visit took place from either side
during the period. However, there have been a few visits
at official level. The most notable was the visit of the
Speaker of the Ethiopian House of Federation, Dr. Mulatu
Teshome to India. He, along with the Presidents (Chief
Ministers) of Two Federal States of Ethiopia, Amhara and
Tigray, visited India from 25 October to 2 November 2004.
A German NGO, GTZ, sponsored the visit. During the
visit Dr. Teshome and his delegation met the Deputy
Chairman of Rajya Sabha, Home Minister of India, Deputy
Chairman of Planning Commission and Chief Minister of
Rajasthan. In addition the UNDP, Ethiopia organized a
study tour of 15-member delegation to Rajasthan in
September 2004. The delegation also comprised President

Burundi
The relations between the two countries remained
friendly.

Comoros
The Foreign Minister of the Union of Comoros H.E. Mr.
Souef Mohamed El-Amine paid an official visit to India
from 23-27 August 2004 at the invitation of External
63

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Sixteen Indian Universities and affiliated colleges/
institutes participated in the fair and it attracted hundreds
of students from Ethiopia and of other nationalities who
were interested in pursuing study in India.

(Chief Ministers) of three Federal States of Ethiopia,
Benishangul-Gomuz, Afar and Gambella.
India participated in the 5th Ordinary Session of the
African Union (AU) Executive Council and the 3 rd
African Union (AU) Summit of the Heads of State and
Government held in Addis Ababa in July 2004. The period
also witnessed growing cooperation between the police
forces of India and Ethiopia. A two-member Indian Police
delegation comprising Shri Sarabjit Singh, Director
General, Bureau of Police Research and Development
(BPR&D), New Delhi and Dr. M.S. Rao, Director-cumChief Forensic Scientist, Directorate of Forensic Science,
visited Ethiopia from 5-11 April 2004. The visit was
followed by a number of police trainers’ delegations. These
visits have enhanced cooperation between the police
forces of the two friendly countries. 15 Ethiopian were
trained in India under ITEC during the period in various
fields like advance networking technology, software
development, advance course in multimedia and web
design, audit of social sectors and international programme
in banking and finance.

Kenya
As in line with the Government of India policy to promote
Indian higher education in countries abroad, FICCI and
UGC organized jointly ‘India Education Fair’ on 12 – 13
June 2004 in which 18 Indian Universities and 9 Vice
Chancellors including JNU, BHU, Symbiosis Pune etc.
participated.
Mr. Kapil Sibal, Minister of State (Independent Charge)
for Ministry of Science & Technology visited Kenya from
14-18 June 2004 to attend the board meeting on
International AIDS Vaccine Initiative. He met the Kenyan
Minister for Education, Science & Technology, Prof.
George Saitoti and proposed the signing of an agreement
on Science & Technology between Kenya and India. This
proposal was accepted in principle. In August 2004 the
Kenyan Foreign Minister, H.E. Mr. Chirau Ali Mwakwere
extended an invitation to India’s External Affairs Minister
to visit Kenya which was accepted in principle. Kenyan
Minister of Justice, Mr. Kiraitu Murungi during his transit
visit to India met the Minister of Justice and told the Press
that India should be a Permanent Member of the UN
Security Council. Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister of State
for Overseas Indian Affairs visited Nairobi from 15-17
November 2004 to promote Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 2005.
Kumari Selja, Minister of State for Urban Employment &
Poverty Alleviation visited Nairobi from 28 September 3 October 2004 to attend Inter-Regional Conference on
Urban-Rural Linkages.

The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) of
India and the Federal Micro and Small Enterprises
Development Agency (FeMSEDA) of Ethiopia entered
into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on micro
and small industries development on 12 July 2004. The
MoU provides for organized micro and small industries
growth in Ethiopia by formulating developmental schemes
and identifying projects to generate employment and selfemployment. The IRCON International Limited was
awarded a contract worth US$ 31 million for construction
of 120 km gravel road in Ethiopia in June 2004 against
tough international bidding. This was the first road
construction project awarded to an Indian company in
Ethiopia. An Indian Company, KEC International Limited
was awarded a contract worth US$ 40 million for
construction of 132 KV Power Transmission Project in
September 2004. The Northern India Textile Research
Association (NITRA) won a consultancy service contract
for setting up a Textile & Garment Industry Support
Institute. The Water and Power Consultancy Services
(India) Limited (WAPCOS), which has been doing
projects in water sector in Ethiopia for past many years,
was also awarded four more projects in September 2004.
A two-day Indian Education Fair was organized in Addis
Ababa on 10 and 11 June 2004 by the UGC and FICCI.
The fair was a part of the Promotion of Indian Higher
Education Abroad (PIHEAD) programme of UGC.

The Nairobi Summit on a Mine-free World, which was
the First Review Conference of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Antipersonnel Mines and on their Destruction,
was held at Nairobi, Kenya from 29 November to 3
December 2004. India participated in the Review
Conference as an Observer.
Ustad Amjad Ali Khan accompanied by his sons, Amaan
Ali and Ayaan Ali and tabla player Ustad Shafaat Ahmed
Khan performed in Nairobi on 26 June and in Mombasa
on 27 June 2004.

Lesotho
A delegation led by Principal Secretary in the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Lesotho visited India from 1-7 August
64

Africa (South of Sahara)

Palestinian Leader Yasser Arafat greets Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs, at the West Bank town of Ramallah
on 17 September 2004.

President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam meets President Thabo Mbeki during his visit to the Republic of South Africa, 14-18 September 2004.

65

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

the Mauritian Foreign Minister Jaya Krishna Cuttaree
emphasised that UN member countries needed to show a
greater commitment towards a reformed UN Security
Council based on wider representation, and reiterated that
India ‘fully deserves’ to have the status of a Permanent
Member on the Security Council. Mr. Jaya Krishna
Cuttaree visited India from 4 to 9 November 2004 to
apprise the Indian leadership about his candidature for
the post of WTO Director General and sought India’s
support for the same. He had meetings with the Indian
leadership, and discussed topical and bilateral matters.

2004 to finalize the establishment of Lesotho High
Commission in New Delhi. The High Commission is
expected to be functional in the coming months. Shri B.S.
Minhas, Secretary, Ministry of Small Scale Industries of
India visited Lesotho on 9-10 October 2004. The two
governments signed an MoU for cooperation in the field
of small-scale industries during this visit. A three-member
ministerial delegation from Lesotho led by their Foreign
Minister visited India from 10-16 October 2004. The main
purpose was to finalize the signing of the US$ 5 million
Line of Credit Agreement between Government of
Lesotho and Export Import Bank of India. Lesotho
government intends to use this credit line largely to
upgrade the agricultural infrastructure in their country.
The food aid of 5000 Metric tonnes each of rice and wheat
promised during the visit of the Prime Minister of Lesotho
to India last year was delivered in June 2004. This gesture
of solidarity was deeply appreciated by the Government
of Lesotho.

Smt. Sonia Gandhi, Member of Parliament and
Chairperson of the United Progressive Alliance, paid a
highly successful visit to Mauritius on 29-30 November
2004. The main event on her schedule was the
inauguration of the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre in
Mauritius, which has been set up with Indian assistance.
She also had meetings with President of Mauritius, Sir
Anerood Jugnauth; the Prime Minister, Hon’ble Paul
Raymond Berenger, who also hosted a banquet in her
honour; and the leader of Opposition in Mauritius, Dr.
Navin Ramgoolam. Minister of State for Overseas Indian
Affairs, Shri Jagdish Tytler visited Mauritius in November
2004. He addressed a meeting of Indian PIO organisations
and invited them to attend the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas
held in January 2005. On 4 October 2004 aircrafts from
the Indian Air Force took part in an Air Show over the
Mon Choisy beach of Mauritius, in collaboration with
helicopters and aircrafts from the Mauritius Coast Guard
and the Mauritian Special Mobile Force. The Air Show,
organised in order to demonstrate the high-performance
machines to the Mauritian public, saw an unprecedented
turnout of over a 100,000 persons. The Prime Minister of
Mauritius, other ministers, and members of the diplomatic
corps also viewed the air show.

Madagascar
At the 59th session of the UNGA, Madagascar supported
our candidature for permanent membership of the Security
Council and voted in favour of our ECOSOC candidature.
A visit to India by the Foreign Minister of Madagascar
Gen. Marcel Ranjeva is being scheduled in the first half
of 2005.
On 30 November 2004 a consignment of medical
equipment valued at approximately Rs. 21 lakhs were
handed over to the Minister of health & Family Planning
of Madagascar as a gift from the Government of India.

Malawi
The new Indian High Commissioner presented his
credentials to the President of Malawi on 12 October
2004. During this meeting, the Malawian President
expressed his interest in further strengthening political,
economic and technological cooperation with India. The
Malawian Minister for Industry, Science and Technology,
Mr. John Bright Khumbo Chirwa visited India from 1219 November 2004. During his stay in New Delhi, he
visited the ITPO trade fair and discussed the prospects of
setting up small and medium enterprises in Malawi by
utilizing locally available resources. Several Malawian
students availed of the ITEC/SCAAP scholarships given
by India to study in our training institutions.

The Joint Study Group created for the formalisation of a
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Partnership
Agreement (CECPA) between Mauritius and India
finalised its report in November 2004. There were
significant developments related to tourist traffic and air
connectivity between India and Mauritius in September
2004. The Mauritian Tourism Minister Anil Gayan also
visited in India, in an effort to promote the tourist appeal
of Mauritius. To woo the Indian tourists, the Government
of Mauritius announced a new relaxed visa regime under
which tourists from India would not be required to obtain
visas for a period of stay not exceeding 15 days, provided
they could show sufficient funds on arrival to finance their

Mauritius
Addressing the UN General Assembly on 28 September,
66

Africa (South of Sahara)

stay. In a major acknowledgment of the potential of this
sector, the Government of Mauritius decided to grant
“Fifth Freedom” rights to Air India on the South Africa
sector, which would permit the Indian flag carrier to
embark and disembark passengers and goods while
transiting through Mauritius on the India-South Africa
routes. Air Mauritius also signed an agreement with
Sahara Airlines of India for using the Indian company’s
domestic network for onward journeys by Air Mauritius
passengers. The agreement increased the reach of Air
Mauritius to 22 cities in the Indian subcontinent.

INS Savitri, in Mozambican waters during the period 30
May to 27 June 2004. The two ships provided coastal
security during the World Economic Forum’s Africa
Economic Summit from 2-4 June 2004 and the 4th ACP
Summit from 23-24 June 2004. Apart from conducting
sea sorties and coastal patrol, the two ships imparted
training to Mozambican navy personnel during the period.
The Mozambican Defence Minister conveyed his
gratitude to India for contributing to strengthening the
capacity of protection and inspection in the Mozambican
seacoast during the two international events. In response
to the request of the Mozambican government, India has
increased the number of SCAAP slots for Mozambique
from 15 to 20 with effect from 2004-5. India also accepted
the nomination of 9 Mozambican students for degree
courses in agricultural science. Training facilities extended
by India are highly appreciated by the Mozambican
authorities.

Mozambique
The already close ties existing with Mozambique
strengthened further during the year. The 1st meeting of
the Joint Working Group(JWG) constituted under the
MoU for cooperation in Labour met in Maputo during
12-16 April 2004. The Indian delegation led by Dr. P.D.
Shenoy, Secretary(Labour), held extensive discussions
with the Mozambican Minister of Labour and other highranking officials of the Ministry of Labour. The Indian
side agreed to provide training facilities to Mozambican
instructors in the areas of employment & vocational
training, social security and labour statistics.

Namibia
The bilateral relations between India and Namibia
continue to be very friendly and are characterised by
mutual appreciation of a strong tradition of cooperation
before and after Namibian independence in 1990. Namibia
has been consistently supporting India in the UN and
other international organisations, including prestigious
candidatures for them. It has supported India’s claim for
Permanent Membership of the Security Council. Shri S.
Krishnan, Senior Deputy Director, Lal Bahadur Shashtri
National Academy of Administration, Mussoori, visited
Namibia from 12-18 April 2004 under the ITEC
programme to advise Government of Namibia on setting
up of a Civil Services’ Institute in Namibia.

Under the HIPC initiative, the Government of India has
written off all outstanding government-to-government
debts to Mozambique. EXIM Bank of India and the
Mozambican authorities signed an agreement for the
utilization of the credit line of US$ 20 million offered by
India to Mozambique during the visit of President
Chissano to India in May 2003. During the visit of a
UNIDO- sponsored delegation of Asia-Pacific
entrepreneurs, comprising Indian businesspersons
representing various groups, the CII signed a cooperation
agreement with the Mozambican chamber of Commerce
and Industry. The consortium of RITES and IRCON Ltd.
was awarded the concession for the rehabilitation and
management of the 600 km. Beira Railway System, which
constitutes the lifeline for the entire Zambezi Valley and
vital access to the Indian Ocean to the landlocked
countries West of Mozambique. The Concession
Agreement was signed by the Government of Mozambique
and the consortium of RITES and IRCON Ltd. and the
CFM, the Mozambican Railway Authority, on 5 October
2004, in the presence of President Chissano and a large
number of members of cabinet.

India’s donation of 5000 tons of rice, announced by our
Prime Minister during the State Visit of the President of
Namibia to India in February 2003, was formally handed
over to the Namibian Government on 3 May 2004. A
six-member delegation from Gem and Jewellery Export
Promotion Council of India visited Namibia from 20-23
June 2004. The visit was at the invitation of the Namibian
Minister of Mines and Energy. Apart from visits by
individual businessmen, a six-member business delegation
from CII visited Namibia from 4-7 July 2004 under the
UNIDO programme of the Africa Asia Investment and
Trade Promotion Centre. Shri S. Ramasundaram, Joint
Secretary in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, led
an official delegation to Namibia to hold negotiations with
SACU to agree on a framework which would serve as a
basis for negotiation of a Free Trade Agreement between

On the request of the Government of Mozambique, India
deployed two Indian Navy ships, namely, INS Sujata and
67

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

personnel and the local SPDF conducted for the second
time a 10 day joint military exercise ‘Black Parrot’ from 8
to 18 November 2004, focusing on anti-coup and antiterrorism actions. Seychelles supported India in various
international fora like, election to the council of ICAO,
re-election of the Indian candidate to UN Advisory
Committee on Administration and Budgetary Questions,
ECOSOC for 2005-07 term, election to UPU and agreed
to vote against the likely resolution by Pakistan on
‘Universal Realization of the rights of peoples to Selfdetermination’ in 59th UNGA.

India and SACU. Both parties agreed on a framework
agreement to be negotiated in two phases. A photographic
exhibition titled “My Land My People”, sponsored by
ICCR was organised in Windhoek, Namibia from 21-28
October 2004.
Mr. Peter Shivute, Chief Justice of Namibia visited India
from 10-12 December 2004 to attend International
Conference of Chief Justices in Lucknow. Namibia being
a nascent democracy has also drawn upon the provisions
of the Indian constitution. Foreign Office Consultations
between Namibia and India are scheduled in the third
week of February 2005.

The second instalment of HIV/Aids antiretroviral drugs
is handed over to Health Minister of Seychelles on 7
January.

Swapo swept the Parliamentary elections winning 74% of
the seats. It’s Presidential candidate Mr. Hifikepunye
Pohamba was also elected convincingly.

An Indian Patrol Boat will be gifted to Seychelles in the
3rd week of February 2005. Five containers of cement
and other construction material along with a team of
engineers from Indian Navy are being sent to Seychelles
to repair bridges and roads damaged by Tsunami.

Document relating to extension of validity of Work Plan
on Agriculture under the cooperation between India and
Namibia in the field of agricultural research and training
up to 31 December 2005 was signed on 11 November
2004.

South Africa

India’s assistance in the vital area of human resource
development has been appreciated by the Namibian
leadership. During the current financial year 13 Namibian
candidates have already availed themselves of the facility
of training under the scholarship schemes of SCAAP/
ITEC. 13 candidates have already been approved for
training during the current year. ICCR scholarships have
been availed of by six Namibian students.

The process of consolidation of the strategic partnership
between India and South Africa relations gathered further
momentum in the course of the current year. Dialogue at
the highest political level between the two countries was
maintained with the visit of the President of India Dr.
A.P.J. Abdul Kalam to South Africa from 14-18 September
2004. This was the first visit by an Indian President to
South Africa and marked a milestone in the bilateral
relationship. The two Presidents exchanged views
regarding the excellent state of bilateral relations, India
Brazil South Africa Forum and issues of regional as well
as global importance. An MoU on Cooperation in
Information and Communications Technology was signed
during the visit. The President addressed the Pan African
Parliament, the first non-African head of state to do so.
The President also visited Durban, where he was accorded
a civic reception. The President of South Africa and the
Prime Minister of India had bilateral discussions on the
sidelines of the UNGA in New York in September 2004.
The South African Foreign Minister and External Affairs
Minister also had a meeting. The Vice President of India
Shri Bhairon Singh Shekhawat visited South Africa from
26 April to 2 May 2004 to attend the inaguration of the
second term of President Thabo Mbeki as well as to join
the celebrations to mark a decade of democracy in South
Africa. India’s high level presence at the function was a
testimony to the closeness of bilateral relations.

Rwanda
The relations between the two countries remained
friendly. Rwanda is soon going to open their Embassy in
New Delhi with resident Ambassador. Draft of a cultural
Exchange Programme has been finalised and would be
signed soon. Rwanda appointed Lt. Gen. Kayumba
Nyamwasa as their first Resident Ambassador to India.

Seychelles
Erstwhile Vice-President James Alix Michel took over as
the third President of Seychelles on 14 April 2004 marking
the end of President Rene’s 27-year tenure. Joseph
Belmont was appointed as the new Vice President. India
donated HIV/Aids antiretroviral drugs worth US $ 50,000
to Seychelles during the year. An Education delegation
from Seychelles visited India (May-June) to identify
various educational institutions for sending Seychellois
students for higher education to India. Indian Defence
68

Africa (South of Sahara)

Trade and Industry Minister of South Africa Mr. Mandisi
Mpahlwa visited New Delhi from 5-7 December 2004 for
the India Economic Summit. He also held bilateral
discussions with the Commerce and industry Minister.

Earlier, Shri B.S. Minhas, Secretary, Ministry of Small Scale
Industries visited South Africa from 2-8 September 2004.
Another significant development was the first meeting of
the India-South Africa CEOs’ Forum on October 25.
President Thabo Mbeki met the Indian delegation and
welcomed the Forum’s determination to bring together
the private sectors of India and South Africa in an
innovative manner so as to leverage the complementary
strengths of the two countries to produce globally products
and services.

Other important outgoing ministerial visits included that
of Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Rao Inderjit
Singh to attend the XIVth NAM Ministerial Conference
and the IInd AASROC (Asian African Sub-Regional
Organisations’ Conference) from 19-20 August 2004. He
called on the President and the Foreign Minister. Minister
of State for Defence Shri B.K. Handique visited South
Africa from 21-25 September at the head of the large
delegation which participated in the African Aero
Defence Exhibition held in Pretoria. He met the Defence
Minister. In November, Minister of State for Overseas
Indians Shri Jagdish Tytler visited South Africa, inter alia,
to promote participation in the third Pravasi Bharatiya
Divas.

Defence cooperation continued to strengthen at the
political as well as operational levels. Noteworthy
developments included the visit of INS Tabar to Cape
Town in July 2004, which successfully projected Indian
Navy’s professional and technologically advanced image.
The Indian Air Force and the South African Air Force
conducted a joint Air Defence Exercise Golden Eagle in
September 2004 for which the IAF deployed six Mirages.
This was the first deployment of IAF Aircraft on such a
scale in a joint exercise in South Africa.

External Affairs Minister of India is scheduled to visit
South Africa in March 2005 for the second trilateral IBSA
Ministerial Joint Commission. South Africa is the partner
country in the International Engineering Trade Fair being
held in February 2005.

There were active cultural exchanges during the year with
a number of music/dance groups visiting South Africa
under the aegis of ICCR. A renowned Indian theatre
group also visited Africa for the first time. The Indian
Experience 2004 was held in Cape Town for the second
time from 31 October to 7 November 2004. The event
included a Fashion Show, Food Festival, a Folk Dance
Performance, a torch light procession to celebrate Diwali,
as well as participation by Indian companies in a trade
fair, thereby projecting the multiple facets of India’s
culture. It was a resounding success with the audience
urging that it should be made an annual event, which
should extend to other cities in South Africa as well.

From the South African side, the most significant visit
was that of a combined delegation comprising Minister
in the Presidency Dr. Essop Pahad, Minister of
Communications Ms. Matsepe Cassaburri and Minister
for Public Service and Administration, Ms. G.J. FraserMoleketi to India from 6-11 September 2004. The
significant outcomes of the visit include a programme for
bilateral cooperation in development of public services
and training. The South African Deputy Minister for
Science and Technology of Mr. Derek Hanekom, visited
India for a meeting of IBSA ministers of S&T in October.
The South African Minister for Industry and Trade Mr.
Mpahlwa visited India from December 6 to 7 for the World
Economic Forum meeting and held bilateral discussions
with his counterpart. Apart from the National level, many
provinces of South Africa also sent delegations to India
to study different aspects of cooperation.

Swaziland
Our Mission in Maputo continued to maintain close
contacts with the Swazi authorities and the Indian
community in that country.

Tanzania
Friendly bilateral relations between Tanzania and India
got further boosted with the State Visit of President Dr.
A. P. J. Abdul Kalam to Dar-es-Salaam and Zanzibar from
11-14 September 2004. This was the first visit of the
President of India after a gap of 15 years. During the visit
two important bilateral agreements on IT and writing off
of Tanzania’s debt were signed. Tanzania has openly
supported India’s candidature for permanent membership

Besides the above significant political exchanges, there
were active contacts at the level of senior officials from
both sides. Notable amongst these was the meeting of
the India-South Africa Commercial Alliance on 25
October 2004. The Indian delegation was led by
Commerce Secretary Shri S.N. Menon. He also met the
Commercial Representatives based in Southern Africa.
69

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

in the UNSC. India supported Tanzanian’s candidature
to the non-permanent Security Council seat at the UNSC.
India donated 5,000 tonnes of wheat and 5,000 tonnes of
rice on 4 June to Tanzania to overcome its drought and
food deficit situation. Tanzania has been one of the largest
beneficiaries under ITEC programme. Tanzanian students
have been coming to India in large numbers to pursue
higher education. In order to help them, an education
fair was organized on 7-8 June in Dar-es-Salaam in which
25 Indian universities and other academic institutions of
higher learning participated. Cultural ties between
Tanzania and India saw a new dimension by the recital of
an 8-member Qawwali troupe, led by Delhi’s Qawwal
Ghulam Qadir Niyazi during April. This was followed by
6-member Kathak troupe during May led by Abhimanyu
Lal. In the field of economy, after a break of 33 years,
Bank of Baroda (Tanzania) Ltd. opened its branch in Dares-Salaam on 13 October 2004 to cater to the large Indian
diaspora as well as business houses and local native
Tanzanians.

Planning, and Economic Development (in charge of
privatisation) visited India with a 9-member delegation
from 20 to 25 November 2004. He called on the
Honourasble Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri Somnath
Chatterjee and held discussions with MPLADS
Committee of Parliament apart from visiting various
developmental sites.

Zambia
India’s relations with Zambia continued to expand during
this period. India donated anti-retroviral drugs worth one
hundred thousand dollars; a consignment of these
medicines was formally handed over by Indian High
Commissioner to the Zambian Health Minister on 8 April
2004. The Government of India decided to write off the
outstanding dues of about $3 million representing the
principal and interest owed on credit line given to Zambia
by India in 1979 after the latter joined the Highly Indebted
Countries Initiative (HIPC). The waiver agreement was
signed by the Finance Minister of Zambia and Indian High
Commissioner on 9 July 2004. The presiding officers of
the Indian Parliament invited the Speaker of the Zambian
National Assembly to visit India with a delegation of
parliamentarians. The invitation was accepted and the
visit is likely to take place in the first half of 2005. Foreign
Office Consultations between India and Zambia were held
on 27-28 February 2005.

Uganda
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement was signed with
the Government of Uganda on 30 April 2004 in
Kampala. Gerald Ssendaula, Ugandan Minister of
Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the
High Commissioner of India on behalf of Government of
India signed the Convention. Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister
of State for Science and Technology and Ocean
Development visited Kampala from 16 to 17 June 2004
to attend the Board Meeting of the International AIDS
Vaccine Initiative (IAVI). He met Ms. Namuyangu Janat
Byakatonda, Minister of State for Industry and
Technology, and senior officials of the Ministry and
Uganda National Council for Science & Technology, on
17 June. Shri Kapil Sibal proposed the signing of an
agreement on Science & Technology between Uganda
and India. This proposal was accepted in principle.
Government of India donated on 5 July 2004 medicines
worth Rs.16,69,747 (approx. US $ 38,000) to the
internally displaced persons of north Uganda. A delegation
from the Government of Gujarat led by Shri Indravijaysinh
Jadeja, Minister for Health & Family Welfare, Road &
Building, Capital Project, Urban Development & Urban
Housing, visited Uganda from 21 to 24 November 2004
with the aim to seek investment by NRIs in Uganda in
Gujarat and their participation in Global Investor Summit
2005.

India’s economic presence in Zambia continued to bolster
with new investments made by the Indian companies and
award of contracts to them. The Zambian government
selected M/s Vedanta Resources, the parent company of
M/s Sterlite Industries of India as the majority equity
partner for the revival of Zambia’s biggest Konkola copper
mines. Another Indian company, M/s Kamani Engineering
Corporation won a contract worth $ 11 million for setting
up a power transmission line between the bordering towns
of Zambia and Namibia. Mr. Ratan Tata, Chairman of the
Tata Group visited Lusaka and called on the Zambian
President on 26 October 2004 and agreed to consider
making new investments in the mining, power generation
and transmission, tourism and automobile sectors. The
Tata Group invested US$ 8 million in the renovation of
Taj Pamodji hotel in Lusaka, a joint venture between the
group and the Government of Zambia. A two member
team comprising the senior officials of M/s Water and
Power Consultancy Services India Ltd. (WAPCOS)
visited Zambia from 15-17 August 2004 to discuss the
modalities of India’s cooperation with the COMESA
Secretariat in the irrigation sector.

Prof. Peter Kasenene, Minister of State for Finance,
70

Africa (South of Sahara)

Zimbabwe

The launch of the new initiative TEAM-9, a technoeconomic cooperation venture between India and eight
countries of West Africa, was a major effort aimed at
demonstrating the special focus that India was putting
on Africa in general and West Africa in particular. Indian
Missions in West Africa were strengthened and Ministry
took a decision to re-open the Indian Embassy in DR
Congo.

India’s friendly and cordial relations with Zimbabwe
consolidated during the year, even though the Zimbabwe’s
economy continued on a downslide. Zimbabwe extended
support to India at the multilateral fora by supporting
India’s candidature at the UN Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC) and the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO). India had supported Zimbabwe at
the UN Commission on Human Rights and in the Third
Committee of UN. Besides, the bilateral relations in other
areas including trade and culture have expanded in
comparison to the previous year.

The region holds great promise for India’s energy security
and the Ministry took the initiative in exploring
possibilities to access the oil and petroleum sector in this
region, particularly in Angola, Nigeria, Cote d’Ivoire,
Mauritania and Equatorial Guinea.

A trade delegation led by Mrs. E. Ndlovu, Permanent
Secretary in the Ministry of Small and Medium
Enterprises, Government of Zimbabwe, visited India in
July for interaction with Confederation of Indian
Industries (CII). The delegation included the Chairman
of the Export Processing Zones Authority (EPZA). The
visit generated considerable interest among Indian
businesses and this encouraged a return visit by a
delegation from Engineering Export Promotion Council
(EEPC) of India, which visited Zimbabwe in August. The
9-member EEPC delegation held a business seminar in
Harare and was able to discuss business deals in various
sectors including agricultural machinery, tractors, textile
machinery, automobiles & automobile parts, agroprocessing machinery, etc. The bilateral interaction was
also enriched by the visit in August of Shujaat Hussein
Khan, the sitar maestro, and his accompanying artistes,
who gave a scintillating performance at the prestigious
Harare International Conference Centre. The cultural
canvas of India was further extended in Zimbabwe through
a Photographic Exhibition curated by the renowned
photographer Raghu Rai. The exhibition was on display
at National Art Gallery, Harare from 8-24 September
2004.

The Ministry also took the lead in devising suitable
financial mechanisms, which would underpin the
expansion of our economic cooperation with Africa. In
this regard various lines of credit were extended to the
countries of West Africa. Trade and economic exchanges,
which were limited, grew rapidly and Indian companies
were encouraged to establish their presence in West
Africa.
India also established its close cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and Ambassador of India to Nigeria was
made the Permanent Representative accredited to the
ECOWAS. Technical Assistance and development aid
continued with food aid given to Cote d’Ivoire and
Guinea. Anti-HIV drugs were also sent to countries in
this region. To help combat the locust infestation in the
Sahelian countries in West Africa, India donated large
amount of pesticides. Similarly, mosquito nets were
provided to the Republic of Congo.

Angola
Bilateral relations between Angola and India have
continued to be warm and friendly. With the cessation of
a prolonged civil war in Angola in April 2002 and its
consolidation during the last 2 years, there have been an
increased number of visits by businessmen from India to
Angola, thus enhancing economic and commercial ties.

For the first time in Zimbabwe African National Union
Patriotic Front’s (ZANU-PF) history, a woman became
the second Vice-President of the party and later on sworn
in as the second Vice President of the country.

WEST AFRICA

India’s exports to Angola during 2002-2003 were of US$
37.31 million while during the period 2003-2004, exports
increased to US$ 70.55 million, i.e., an increase of 89.10%.

India enjoys cordial links with the countries of West Africa.
However, to foster greater cooperation and to forge closer
linkages with the countries of this region the Ministry
created a new division for West Africa. The creation of
the new division helped in providing greater impetus to
India’s growing relations with the countries of this region.

RITES Limited would be implementing the Angolan
Railway Rehabilitation Project in Huila province in
Angola very soon. An MoU to this effect was signed on
24 June 2004. This project is being supported by a line of
71

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Burkina Faso

credit of US$ 40 million extended by the Government of
India to the Government of Angola.

Burkina Faso sees India as an important partner for their
development in the areas of information technology and
communications, infrastructure development,
development of small and medium enterprises, mining,
pharmaceuticals, agriculture and some other sectors.

India has also extended a credit line of US$ 5 million for
promotion of Indian exports. A prominent Indian
company would be supplying agricultural equipment to
the Ministry of Agriculture, Government of Angola
against this line of credit. The Angolan Minister of
Agriculture visited India in February 2004 with a view to
sourcing additional irrigation pumps and other equipment
from India.

The delegated Minister for Regional Cooperation in the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of
Burkina Faso, Mr. T. Jean de Dieu Somda, visited India
from 29 February to 2 March 2004 to attend the TEAM9 Ministerial Meeting. A list of projects for financing under
the TEAM-9 initiative has also been sent to the Ministry
for approval.

Telecommunications Consultants of India Limited (TCIL)
signed a composite MoU, comprising five possible areas
for cooperation in telecommunications sectors, with
Angola’s Ministry of Telecommunications on 24
September 2004 in Luanda.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of Burkina Faso, Mr. Youssouf Ouedraogo visited
India in July 2004 to discuss bilateral and other issues of
mutual interest. Burkina Faso has also expressed interest
in availing of the proposed GOI initiative of providing a
separate Credit (US $ 1.5 billion) for Sub-Saharan African
countries for importing ARV (anti-retroviral) drugs for
HIV/AIDS, general pharmaceuticals, medical equipments,
and training from India.

State Bank of India would be opening its Representative
Office in Luanda soon.
Mr. Jorge Valentim, Minister for Hotels and Tourism of
Angola, visited India from 5-11 July 2004. During his visit,
he attended the 73rd Session of the Consultative Council
of the World Tourism Organization and a Seminar on
International Control of Tourism in Hyderabad. He also
met senior officials of ONGC Videsh Limited.

In September 2004, this mission arranged the visit of
India’s Special Envoy, Shri Salman Khurshid to Burkina
Faso to attend the African Union’s Extra-ordinary
Summit, which was being held in Ouagadougou. The
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation Mr.
Youssouf Ouedraogo met with Shri Salman Khurshid to
discuss bilateral issues of mutual interest. Shri Khurshid
also met the President of the National Assembly (and
former Prime Minister) Mr. Roch-Marc Christian Kaboré.
Mission also organized meetings with leaders of
delegations of some 25 African countries to obtain support
for India’s candidature for the UN ECOSOC, which
culminated in wide support by African countries and
contributed to India’s success in ECOSOC elections.

Angola is increasingly utilizing the training slots being
offered under Indian Technical Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Programme offered by Ministry of External Affairs.
Recently, President, REA (one of the Angolan Chambers
of Commerce and Industry) attended a course conducted
by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in New
Delhi from 4-10 October 2004.
With bilateral cooperation ever rising, the number of
Indian professionals coming to Angola is also on the
increase. The Indian community in Angola numbers
nearly 200. While some work in Angolan oilfields, others
deal in business and trade. On 13 November 2004, the
Indian community in Luanda formed Indian Association
of Angola.

A delegation from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Regional Co-operation of Burkina Faso, led by Director
(Asia Pacific & Caribbean), Mr. Piabie Firmin Gregoire
N’DO visited the High Commission of India, Accra, on
22 March 2004 to discuss bilateral issues including their
request for the visit of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Burkina Faso to India, TEAM-9 cooperation, the
possibilities of training of Burkina Faso personnel in areas
of diplomacy, IT, defence, journalism, etc., and holding of
the Third Session of the Joint Commission in
Ouagadougou.

Benin
Benin’s Foreign Ministry reiterated its commitment to
establish an Embassy in New Delhi. Benin, an elected
member of the UN Security Council, has been expressing
its desire to enhance bilateral relations with India and
has been recognizing India’s leadership role in SouthSouth cooperation as well as in appropriate technology.
72

Africa (South of Sahara)

its Embassy in India. The Cote d’ Ivoire’s first Ambassador,
Mr. Bleu Laine presented his credentials on 29 September
2004.

Both total trade and exports from India to Burkina Faso
have increased significantly in 2003-04, and estimates for
2004-05 indicate that this very positive trend will continue
for 2004-05. The positive trend in bilateral trade and
India’s exports to Burkina Faso will continue in 2004-05
with total trade reaching an estimated US$ 50 million.

A delegation from Independent Electoral Commission
(CEI) of Cote d’ Ivoire headed by Mr. Camille Hoguie,
the Chairman, visited India from 5 September to 11
September 2004. The delegation conveyed that they need
India’s help, particularly, its expertise and experience in
registration of people for elections and electronic voting
machines etc. The CEI signed two MoUs – one with the
Election Commission of India for cooperation in electoral
matters and second with CMC Ltd. for supply and services
for holding IT enabled elections in Cote d’ Ivoire.

Cape Verde
Indian naval ship INS-Tabar visited Mindelo, Cape Verde
from 26-29 May 2004 on its maiden voyage. This was the
first visit to Cape Verde by any Indian naval ship. The
Cape Verde authorities helped in providing the necessary
logistical support and in organizing the necessary meetings.

Central African Republic(CAR)

India donated 100,000 US$ worth of anti-retroviral
medicines to Cote d’Ivoire.

Bilateral relations between India and the Central African
Republic have been stagnating since 1998. The former
Ambassador (desig.) to the CAR was not able to present
his credentials. Also, it is almost three years now and the
Agreement in respect of the present Ambassador (design.)
has not been conveyed by the CAR authorities. As such,
no forward movement in bilateral relations has taken place
and there are no significant developments to report. One
of the reasons for the above mentioned lack of response
from CAR is the internal situation in the country following
the coup d’etat in March 2003, in which President Felix
Patasse was ousted by a former army chief of CAR, General
Francoise Bozize.

Cote d’Ivoire has been regularly availing the scholarships
under the ITEC programme. During the year, twenty-nine
ITEC scholarships were availed of by Cote d’Ivoire.

Democratic Republic of Congo
Relations with DR Congo grew rapidly this year following
the appointment of the DRC Ambassador to India.
Ministry also took a decision to re-open the Indian
Embassy in Kinshasa. This will be implemented soon once
the financial and manpower requirements are allocated.
Trade and economic relations continued to rise with
various Indian companies visiting the DRC to do business
in pharmaceuticals, machinery, diamonds, ores and
minerals etc. The population of the Indian community in
DRC has grown substantially.

Chad
The TEAM-9 initiative launched in March 2004 in New
Delhi was received with enthusiasm in Chad. Joint
Secretary (West Africa) Shri E. Barwa visited N’djamena
in April 2004 to follow up on the initiative, and held
discussions with the Deputy Prime Minister of Chad as
well as various Chadian government officials. During the
course of the year, various officials in the nodal ministries
were identified who are looking into specific projects under
the initiative.

India has one of its largest contingents abroad in the DR
Congo and has committed more than 3250 troops, 10
helicopters, Hospital, Communication Unit etc. to the
UN Peacekeeping Force in DR Congo.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the DRC, Mr. Ramazani
Baya visited India from 2-4 February 2005. He called on
Shri Natwar Singh, External Affairs Minister, where wideranging discussions were held in a friendly and cordial
atmosphere and both sides exchanged views on various
bilateral, regional and international issues of mutual
interest. Mr. Baya had a meeting with the Confederation
of Indian Industry (CII) and with the Associated
Chambers of Commerce (ASSOCHAM), where he met
a cross-section of the Indian business community and
invited them to participate in the opportunities offered
by DR Congo.

5000 tons of rice earlier donated to Chad by India reached
during the course of the year. It was well appreciated by
the authorities, especially with the influx of refugees from
across the Darfur region of Sudan.

Cote D’ Ivoire
Despite the difficult situation arising out of the crisis in
Cote d’Ivoire, the Indian Mission kept on functioning.
Relations between the two countries were further
strengthened when for the first time, Cote d’ Ivoire opened
73

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

levels in all spheres. Some of the major developments are
summarized below together with agreements signed during
the year.

India agreed to consider extending the scope of ongoing
cooperation under the Indian Technical & Economic
Cooperation Programme. The Congolese side requested
for an increase in the number of ITEC slots and
scholarships being extended by India. India agreed to
consider the request favourably.

The India-Ghana Kofi Annan Centre of Excellence in
ICT which was set up with India’s assistance is now fully
operational and is doing exceedingly well showcasing
India’s capabilities in the IT sector in Ghana. Prospects
for it’s serving the needs of other ECOWAS countries are
very good.

To further strengthen the economic cooperation and to
provide a juridical framework for increased interaction,
both sides agreed to initiate work towards the signature
of a Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement and a Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement.

To facilitate bilateral trade, two Lines of Credit (LOCs)
were agreed for Ghana. The first signed EXIM Bank line
of credit of $15 million for a rural electrification project
became effective, and disbursements are expected to
commence soon. A second US $27 million EXIM LOC,
which was announced by the then PM at the abovementioned meeting in Abuja, has been approved and is
in the process of being implemented. These LOCs will
help finance projects with poverty alleviation objectives
in various sectors including rural electrification, purchase
of tractors for the President’s Special Initiative on
agriculture and purchase of buses for transportation sector.

The Congolese side requested for a bilateral line of credit
of US$ 50 million to help finance projects in the
agriculture, pharmaceuticals, urban transport,
infrastructure, mining and minerals sector. India agreed
to consider the request favourably and requested the
Congolese side to prepare proposals for specific projects
of mutual interest.

Equatorial Guinea
Relations with Equatorial Guinea grew steadily. Economic
co-operation, which was negligible before, has been on
the rise. There are a large number of Indians working in
the oil sector and other fields in Equatorial Guinea.

Senior Minister, Mr. J. H. Mensah, of Ghana visited India
from 1-2 March 2004 to participate in the inaugural
meeting of TEAM-9. List of projects for financing under
TEAM-9 have been sent to Ministry. They include
projects in the power, agriculture, railways and industrial
sectors.

The TEAM-9 initiative was received with enthusiasm in
Equatorial Guinea. Joint Secretary (West Africa) Shri E.
Barwa visited Malabo in April 2004 to follow up on the
initiative, and held discussions with various government
officials. He was received by the President Col. Teodoro
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo who welcomed the initiative.
The President asked for India’s help in setting up of
hydroelectric power stations, water management and
treatment plants, development of small scale industries
etc.

Indians are now the second largest foreign investor in the
private sector in Ghana and the Indian private sector is
continuing to steadily increase its presence in Ghana. A
number of Indian professionals are also working in the
country. Some of the Indian companies, which have
stationed their representatives in Ghana, are NIIT &
APTECH (Software companies), TATA, Telco, Maruti,
Dr. Reddy’s Lab, Core Care Health India etc. About 500
TATA vehicles have been purchased by Ghana. There
are a number of Indian companies, especially in
pharmaceutical sector, which have posted their country
managers here. Indian pharmaceutical products now
account for about 50% of the Ghana’s drugs and
pharmaceutical imports. Among public sector companies,
TCIL of India was awarded a US $50 million contract by
Ghana Telecommunications Co. for installation of Copper
Access Network and a $10 million contract for pay
phones.

Representatives of Indian companies have started visiting
Equatorial Guinea to identify projects and to establish
business links.

Ghana
Subsequent to the visit of Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor,
President of the Republic of Ghana to India in 2002 and
the meeting between the then Prime Minister of India,
Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee and Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor
on the sidelines of CHOGM meeting in Abuja (Nigeria)
in December 2003, Indo-Ghana bilateral relations, which
had received a huge boost by these events, have continued
their strong upward trend and increased to unprecedented

Under its policy of South-South cooperation, India
continued to offer training courses to Ghanaian civil
74

Africa (South of Sahara)

tonnes of rice to Guinea. In addition, anti-retroviral
medicines worth US$100,000 were also donated.

servants under the ITEC/SCAAP programme. Between
April and November 2004, 50 Ghanaians had undertaken
training in various areas, from the 60 training slots for
this year. The mission has requested an additional 25 slots
this year, as human resource development is a key objective
of the Ghanaian government’s developmental
programmes. The five available long-term scholarships
under the Cultural Exchange Programme and
Commonwealth Scholarship Programme have been
awarded and are being utilized by Ghanaian students for
undergoing higher studies in Indian universities.

Guinea-Bissau
Relations with Guinea-Bissau have grown particularly
since they have become part of the new initiative TEAM9. Bissau Guinean Foreign Minister H.E. Mr. Jose Joao
Silva Monteiro visited India on 1 March 2004 to
participate in the inaugural TEAM-9 meeting.
Economic co-operation is on the rise and various Indian
companies visited Guinea-Bissau to explore business
opportunities. A few projects have been signed. GuineaBissau availed of one ITEC slot for participating in the
36th PCFD conducted by FSI.

The number of high-level government and private sector
delegations visiting India and Ghana has increased
considerably in 2004-05. These include ministers, publicsector organizations, business delegations, senior
government officers, Export Promotion Councils, MPs,
etc.

Mali
Relations with Mali have been on the upswing particularly
after they formed part of the new initiative TEAM-9.
Malian Foreign Minister Lassana Traore visited India from
1-2 March 2004 to participate in the inaugural meeting
of TEAM-9. Mali has expressed interest in soliciting
Indian investments in raw cotton production and
processing and setting up of mini cement plants. Mali is
also interested in setting up a tractor assembly unit under
the TEAM-9 mechanism. In this connection they have
requested for an Indian expert to undertake a feasibility
study for a tractor assembly plant in Mali. HMT (I) has
agreed to undertake this study.

Economic and commercial relations between Ghana have
shown a dramatic increase. This trend in India’s bilateral
trade with Ghana, which shows significant increase in
trade and India’s exports (up 65% in 2003-04), is expected
to continue in 2004-05. Exports to Ghana are estimated
to increase by 62% and the total trade is projected to
increase by 59% in 2004-05. To a large extent, these strong
results may be attributable to the aggressive trade
promotion and commercial initiative that were
undertaken by the Indian Mission. Indian companies are
also increasingly bidding on large international tenders
financed by World Bank, etc., and are being assisted by
the Indian Mission in this regard.

Mauritiana
A high-level Petroleum India International (PII)
delegation led by Ambassador visited Mauritania to hold
discussions on rehabilitation and operation of the SOMIR
refinery in Nouadhibou, supply of explosives to National
Iron Ore Mining Company (SNIM) and to explore oil
exploration prospects in Mauritania. The delegation had
an audience with President Maouya Sidi Ould Ahmed
Taya, and called on the Minister for Hydraulics and Energy,
Mr. Saad Bouch Kamara and the Minister for Mines and
Industry, Mr. Zeidane Ould Hmeida. Mauritania
Government has also expressed interest in training of its
professionals in the petroleum sector in India.

Some initiatives of strategic importance for India are
underway. In the petroleum sector, an MoU has been
signed between ONGC (Videsh) and the Ghana National
Petroleum Company for co-operation in petroleum
exploration, development and production. In downstream
petroleum activities, a dialogue is underway between
Indian Oil Corporation and Ghana Oil Company for co
operation. Efforts are underway for the supply of
Manganese from Ghana for the steel industry in India. A
prospective investment by Gems & Jewellery Export
Promotion Council of India in diamond mining in Ghana
is under consideration. State Bank of India is in the process
of opening a branch in Accra.

Mauritania has availed of two ITEC slots for IT training.
The Director General of Mauritanian Water Board has
been invited on a study visit to India.

Guinea
Relations with Guinea have remained cordial. As part of
its efforts at establishing closer links, Guinea has appointed
their new Honorary Consul in India. India donated 1000

Niger
Political relations between India and Niger are cordial.
75

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

There have been no important visits between the two
countries in 2003-04. On 26 November 2004, the
President of Niger has sent a communication to Indian
Prime Minister regarding Niger’s interest in availing of
NEPAD financing for some of its development projects.
Niger has also expressed its desire to be part of the TEAM9 initiative.

of the progress. On its part, Nigeria released a part of the
counterpart funding and further progress is ongoing.
An Indian delegation led by Shri M.S. Srinivasan,
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas, and comprising senior executives of Indian Oil
Corporation visited Nigeria from 11-13 August 2004 and
held discussions regarding renewal of the term contract
for the supply of 40,000 bpd of crude oil.

Trade relations have been growing. Some TATA buses
and mini-buses have been purchased by International
Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
(ICRISAT) office in Niamey.

On 10 September 2004, the Indian Oil Corporation signed
a MoU with Edo State in Nigeria for setting up an oil
refinery. This refinery is expected to have a capacity of
about 9 million tonnes per year and the final investment
is likely to be of the order of US$ 1.5 billion. Further talks
between the Edo State representatives and IOC were held
in New Delhi from 29-30 November 2004.

Samples of paddy have been provided to the Government
of Niger. An agreement between ICAR of India and
National Agronomic Research Institute of Niger
(INRAN) in the field of agricultural research has been
finalized but the response of the Niger Government to
the text provided by us is awaited.

On the defence side, a team from India’s National Defence
College consisting of 14 officers visited Nigeria on a study
tour from 17 to 21 May 2004 while 15 Nigerian Armed
Forces officers underwent training in various defence
training institutes in India over the year.

Nigeria
India continued developing its excellent bilateral relations
with Nigeria in the year 2004-05. The visit of President
Olusegun Obasanjo, who is also the current Chairman of
the African Union and the Chairperson of CHOGM, to
New Delhi on 2-3 November 2004, gave further impetus
to India-Nigeria relations. President Obasanjo exchanged
views with the Indian Prime Minister on bilateral relations,
peace and security in Africa and also reform of the United
Nations. He said that India is a natural candidate for the
Permanent Membership of UN Security Council. The
Nigerian President expressed appreciation for Indian
Government’s assistance given to Nigerian Machine Tools.
He also appreciated India’s initiatives under New
Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) under
which India would provide credit lines of US $ 200 million
to African countries. President Obasanjo assured that
Nigeria would provide more crude oil directly to India.
He invited Indian companies to participate in bids for oil
exploration and production, and to participate in power
generation and LPG. Smt. Sonia Gandhi, Chairperson of
the United Progressive Alliance also met with President
Obasanjo.

Republic of Congo
To establish closer links, India appointed its first Honorary
Consul General of India to the Republic of Congo.
The Government of Congo has requested for India’s
assistance in health sector, environment and forests. India
is donating 200,000 mosquito nets as part of its Aid to
Africa scheme. The Republic of Congo utilizes the Indian
ITEC slots actively.
An ROC defence delegation visited New Delhi from 29
July to 4 August 2004 and during the discussions with
our Ministry of Defence, handed over a list of ROC’s
defence requirements. India has agreed to consider the
request.

Republic of Gabon
The momentum of bilateral relations between India and
Gabon is growing. The appointment of a Consul General
of India to Gabon in year 2003 and the subsequent
appointment of a Gabonese Honorary Consul in India
have helped in greater interaction.

Meanwhile, the agreement signed in 2001 for the revival
of Nigerian Machine Tools (NMT) under the Government
of India grant of US$ 5 million, proceeded well with all
the machinery supplied by HMT (I) reaching NMT during
the course of the year. Joint Secretary (MER) from Ministry
of External Affairs visited Nigeria in April 2004 for review

Government of Gabon has sought India’s assistance in
the development of their health and small/medium scale
industrial sectors and deputation of Indian professionals
to Gabon. Gabon is increasingly utilizing ITEC slots.

76

Africa (South of Sahara)

Sao Tome and Principe (STP)

India and Senegalese Ministry of Finance was signed in
Mumbai on 10 December 2004.

Relations with STP remained cordial. During an official
visit to Sao Tome and Principe in June 2004, Ambassador
of India met Ministers of Natural Resources and
Environment, Health, Agriculture, Rural Development
and Fisheries and discussed matters of bilateral interest.
STP dignitaries showed keen interest in strengthening
political, economic and commercial relations with India.
ITEC slots are being increasingly utilized by STP.

Senegal has been regularly availing the scholarships under
the ITEC programme. During April-November 2004, nine
ITEC scholarships were availed of by Senegal.
At the request of the Senegal Government, M/s HMT (I)
sent additional equipment and an engineer as part of
upgrading the India-established US $4.5 million
Entrepreneur and Technical Development Centre
(ETDC) at Dakar.

Senegal
Foreign Minister Mr. Cheikh Tidiane Gadio visited India
from 8-11 September 2004. Minister Gadio called on the
External Affairs Minister, Shri Natwar Singh as well as
on Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister for Finance, Shri
Dayanidhi Maran, Minister of Communications and IT
and Shri J.N. Dixit, National Security Adviser to the Prime
Minister. The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
organized a business meeting for Minister Gadio. He also
addressed a conference at the Indian Council of World
Affairs on NEPAD, TEAM-9 and cooperation between
India and Africa. In the Joint Statement, issued at the
end of the visit, it was agreed that Senegal would host
the second session of the bilateral Joint Commission
Meeting in January 2005. In order to further strengthen
the economic cooperation, the two sides agreed to take
necessary steps towards signing the Bilateral Investment
Promotion & Protection Agreement and Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreement. India agreed to offer Senegal a
line of credit of US$ 18 million for acquisition of 350 buses
from India. This has since been implemented. It was also
agreed that India would assist in the establishment of a
tractor assembly plant in Senegal as part of the US $15
million credit line already offered to Senegal for acquiring
tractors and other agricultural equipment from India. Mr.
Gadio visited India again in January 2005 to express his
Government’s condolences for the tsunami disaster as well
as at the passing away of former PM Narasimha Rao and
of NSA Shri J.N. Dixit.

At the request of the Senegalese Government, an Indian
maize expert was sent under ITEC to submit a report on
technologies required for upgrading the Senegalese maize
industry.
The Health Minister of Senegal visited India from 21-24
February 2005. Apart from meeting his Indian
counterpart, he also visited the Ranbaxy factory in Indore
and the Serum Institute of India in Pune.
A five member Senegalese delegation from Farut Media
Centre visited Bangalore under the programme
“Synchronization”, jointly organized by Shristhi School
of Art and Design, Bangalore and Future Academy,
London from 20 March to 5 April 2004.
A three -year India-Senegal Cultural Exchange
Programme for the period 2004-06 was signed in Dakar
on 30 September 2004 by the Senegalese Minister of
Culture, Mrs. Safietou Ndiaye Diop and the Ambassador.
As part of the celebration of the 135th birth anniversary
of Mahatma Gandhi, Minister Diop inaugurated on 27
October 2004 a bust of Mahatma Gandhi at the Chancery
premises. She also inaugurated a photographic exposition
on Mahatma Gandhi at the Cheikh Anta Diop University,
Dakar. The exhibition was opened to public from 27
October to 12 November 2004. A seminar was organized
at the Dakar University on “The relevance of Gandhian
thought in the 21st century”. On 31 October, the film
“Making of the Mahatma” was screened at the Dakar
University auditorium.

The Senegalese Minister for Tourism, Mr. Ousmane
Masseck Ndiaye visited India to participate in the Tourism
Summit at Hyderabad. He also met the Hon’ble Minister
for Chemicals & Fertilizers in connection with the IndoSenegalese joint venture Industries Chimiques du Senegal
(ICS).

Sierra Leone
Relations with Sierra Leone remained cordial. Sierra
Leone has requested India’s help in rebuilding its economy.
Despite the difficult situation there, Sierra Leone
continued to avail ITEC scholarships. During the year,
they availed of 8 slots.

The first round of DTAA negotiations took place in New
Delhi from 30 November-3 December 2004. The US $15
million line of credit agreement between EXIM Bank of
77

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Togo

India is in the process of providing military assistance to
Sierra Leone through building of barracks and providing
training to its military personnel.

Bilateral relations between India and Togo have remained
cordial. India’s Special Envoy Shri Salman Khurshid met
with the Togolese delegation to the Extraordinary Summit
of AU in Ouagadougou in September 2004. Togo has been
generally supportive of our requests for support of
candidatures for UN positions and ECOSOC. However,
there has been no major activity. Commercial activity had
picked up somewhat in 2003-04 but the level of trade has
been the same as the previous year and India’s exports to
Togo have declined from the previous year.

The Gambia
Mr. Sidi Morro Sanneh, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of the Gambia paid a visit to India from 11-13
January 2005. Mr. Sanneh led a 15-member delegation,
which included three Ministers dealing with Health &
Social Welfare, Education and Agriculture.
Mr. Sanneh called on External Affairs Minister and held
official talks with Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State
for External Affairs. The delegation had a meeting with
CII and interacted with a cross-section of Indian
businessmen. They also visited some of the manufacturing
facilities in these sectors.

Togo wants India’s assistance in the health, agriculture,
and education sectors and in human resource
development and training.

ECOWAS
As part of it’s efforts at forging closer links with the
countries of West Africa, India started discussions with
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to establish a consultation and dialogue
mechanism. On 13 October 2004, the High Commissioner
to Nigeria, Shri Atish Sinha, became the first Permanent
Representative of India to be accredited to the
(ECOWAS) with an observer status. ECOWAS Executive
Secretary Dr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, received High
Commissioner Sinha’s credentials and in turn handed over
a letter which stated that the appointment would
“encourage the development initiatives and the realization
of projects aimed at accelerating the pace of integration
in the sub-region, for the greater well-being of the West
African people”. He expressed hope that it would “deepen
and facilitate a further expansion of India-ECOWAS
relations”.

They requested India’s help on various issues including
setting up of their Planning Commission, recruitment of
judges, purchase of agricultural machinery, hiring of
educators for its universities, setting up of IT Training
Centres & Call Centres, pharmaceuticals etc. Mr. Sanneh
also requested for provision of lines of credit for some of
these proposals.
The Indian community in The Gambia has steadily
increased and now numbers over 250. They are mainly in
retail trade and restaurant business, though there have
been significant investment in agriculture and groundnut
oil refinery.

78

Europe

EUROPE I

7

European Union. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
led the Indian delegation and was assisted by External
Affairs Minister Shri Natwar Singh, Commerce and
Industry Minister Shri Kamal Nath and NSA Shri J.N.
Dixit. The EU delegation was led by the Dutch PM and
then President-in-Office of the European Council Dr. JanPeter Balkenende, and included the President of the
European Commission, Dr. Romano Prodi, the EU High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy Mr. Javier Solana, the EC Trade Commissioner Mr.
Pascal Lamy, and the Dutch Foreign Minister, Dr. Bernard
Bot. The Summit launched a Strategic Partnership
between EU and India. It had an agenda that spanned
the entire spectrum of India-EU relations, including global
issues such as the fight against international terrorism,
the role of multilateralism, regional developments of
mutual concern, and a review of cooperation between the
two sides on economic and trade matters. The scope of
enhancing relations on the Science & Technology front
was also underlined, particularly in the context of the
proposed signing of a Framework Agreement between the
two sides regarding India’s participation in the Galileo
Project, and India’s interest in the ITER project. India
and the EU also decided to set up an Energy Panel and an
Environment Forum and agreed to draw up a Joint Action
Plan covering the entire gamut of India-EU relations. The
two sides also issued a Joint Declaration on Cultural
Relations and a Joint Press statement. The Political
Summit was followed by a CEOs Round Table from both
sides. Prime Minister addressed the Round Table and
reiterated the Government’s commitment to continuing
the economic reform process. He invited European
companies to look at the new investment opportunities
emerging in India in various sectors.

I

ndia’s engagement with the individual countries in
Europe and the European Union continued to grow during
the year. Interactions were marked by regular exchanges
of visits, including at the highest level, demonstrating a
mutual desire to deepen and diversify bilateral relations.
India shared a strategic relationship with France, Germany
and UK and growing ties with a number of other countries
in Europe, aimed at promoting more intensive bilateral
cooperation over a wide range of areas. The 5th India-EU
Summit, held at The Hague in November 2004, was a
landmark in India’s relations with the EU, for it launched
the India-EU Strategic Partnership in recognition of
India’s growing stature as a major regional and global
player. Interactions with individual countries in Europe
reflected a shared understanding on various international
issues. On the debate on UN reforms, India was able to
garner significant support from several EU Member States.
India and Germany, in a strategic move, agreed to support
each other’s candidature in an expanded UNSC.
Economic considerations continue to underpin India’s
strong ties with countries in Europe. The desire of EU
Member States to enter into bilateral agreements/MoUs
for enhanced S&T cooperation in niche areas of
technology demonstrate the growing recognition of India’s
potential in this area. The civil society dialogue with major
European countries, represented by the different Eminent
Persons Groups and Round Tables, was another dimension
of the multi-faceted relationship.

European Union (EU)
The year 2004 has been a watershed year for both India
and the EU (its membership expanded from 15 to 25
countries). The EU upgraded its bilateral relations with
India to a Strategic Partnership. India joins five other
countries with which EU has this privileged relationship.
The 5th India-EU Summit – the latest in the series of the
annual institutionalized political dialogue at the highest
level between India and the EU – was held on 8 November
2004 at The Hague, under the Dutch Presidency of the

Interaction with the European Parliament continued
during the year. An ad hoc delegation of the European
Parliament, led by Mr. John Cushnahan, MEP, visited New
Delhi and J&K from 20 to 24 June 2004. A delegation of
the South Asia and SAARC delegation of the EP led by
Chairperson Ms. Neena Gill, visited India from 1 – 6
November. The delegation met External Affairs Minister,
79

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

the Minister for Information & Broadcasting and the
Minister for Environment, besides the Standing
Committee on External Affairs, Rajya Sabha Members,
former Home Minister Shri L.K. Advani, Shri N.N. Vohra,
Co-Chair of the India-EU Round Table, and the National
Human Rights Commission, FICCI and CII. A group of
four Indian MPs visited Brussels in late November 2004
to participate in the IPU Conference on WTO issues.

attracted the attention of economic actors as well as
researchers on both sides. In March 2004, Shri V.S.
Ramamurthy, Secretary, Department of Science and
Technology, led a delegation to Brussels to attend the first
India-EC Steering Committee meeting, during which an
India-EC Programme of Cooperation in S&T, 2004-2006
and a Joint Statement were signed. The two sides agreed
to jointly organize 4 workshops during 2004-2005, in the
areas of nanotechnology, genomics in health & food,
surface transport (automotive sector) and sustainable
development (natural disasters mitigation). The joint
activities and projects will be assisted within the Sixth
Framework of Research and Technological Development
(RTD) for 2002-2006 of the EU. The 14th meeting of the
India-EU Joint Commission was held in Brussels on 10
September 2004. The 2004 Euro-India Cooperation
Forum on Information Society was held in New Delhi on
24-26 March 2004.

External Affairs Minister, Shri Natwar Singh, visited
Brussels on 13-15 September 2004, and met the CSFP
High Representative Javier Solana, former External
Relations Commissioner, Chris Patten and his successor,
Ms. Benita Ferrero Waldner, the Dutch FM Bernard Bot
(in his capacity as President of the European Foreign
Affairs Council), and the Belgian Foreign Minister Mr.
Karel de Gucht. He held extensive talks with them on a
range of bilateral, regional and international issues of
concern.

Civil society dialogue between India and EU continued
during the year. The Seventh and Eighth Meetings of the
India-EU Round Table were held in June 2004 in Srinagar
and in London in December 2004 respectively. At the 7th
round, bilateral cooperation for ‘Enlarging Tourism’,
‘Promoting Trade and Sustainable Development’ and a
discussion on operationalisation of the Civil Society
Internet Forum were discussed. The 8th meeting of the
Round Table was co-chaired by Ms Anne-Marie Sigmund,
President of the European Economic and Social
Committee (EESC) on the EU side and Shri N.N. Vohra,
the India Co-Chair. Among other issues, it discussed
labour relations in the EU and in India and cooperation
in education and training.

A delegation of four senior Members of the European
Parliament, including the President of the EPP Group in
the European Parliament Mr. Hans-Gert Poettering and
the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee Mr. Elmar
Brok, visited India in February 2005. The delegation met
External Affairs Minister and held discussions with
Members of the Standing Committee on External Affairs.
These meetings were especially important in the context
of our efforts to enhance mutual understanding amongst
Parliamentarians on both sides.
India and the EU have substantial trade and economic
interests. The EU (as a bloc of 25 nations) is India’s largest
export destination and has a share of over 24 per cent in
her total exports. India’s exports to the EU in 2003 were
Euros 13.30 billion and imports were worth Euros 14.20
billion – an increase of nearly 7 per cent over the previous
year. In the year 2003, India was the 19th largest exporter
to EU and occupied a share of 1.35 per cent in the total
EU imports. On the other hand, India was the 16th largest
importer of EU’s products and had a share of 1.46 per
cent in EU’s global exports. The EU is one of the largest
sources of FDI for India. Between the years 1991 to 2003,
cumulative actual inflows are estimated at around Euros
6.2 billion, according to Eurostat Data. The most
important sources of FDI from the EU are UK, Germany,
and the Netherlands followed by France, Italy and
Belgium.

EU development cooperation assistance to India has
generally been focused in the areas of environment, public
health and education. In the second phase of its
programme on education, the EC has made a commitment
of Euros 200 million for the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyaan (SSA)
Programme, envisaged for the development of primary
education covering 42 districts. The EC has drafted a new
development cooperation strategy for its relations with
India, articulated in its Country Strategy Paper for India
2002-2006, under which it has committed Euros 225
million for this period. The sectoral approach has now
been replaced with a ‘state-partnership’ approach.
Towards this end, the two sides signed an MoU on the
States Partnership Programme during the year and
Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan have been selected by the
EC under this programme. The EC launched two new

The Framework Agreement for Science & Technology
Cooperation between India and the EU increasingly
80

Europe

met his counterpart Mr Alistair Darling in September.
An ‘Incredible India Evening’ was organized in London
on 4 October 2004 to promote tourism with the
participation of Smt. Renuka Chowdhury, Minister of
Tourism. About 18 delegations from various states
participated at the World Tourism Market held in London.
Delegations from Haryana and Sikkim were led by the
Chief Ministers and some were led by State Tourism
Ministers. Minister of Communications and IT Shri
Dayanidhi Maran visited British Telecom laboratories in
Ipswich in September. Minister of State for Science and
Technology Shri Kapil Sibal visited London to address an
All Party Parliamentary Group on AIDS at the House of
Commons in London in October. Smt. Panabaka Laxmi,
Minister of State for Health met her counterpart Mr. John
Hutton in London in November and discussed the scope
for bilateral cooperation in healthcare sector. Chief
Ministers of Chhattisgarh and Haryana held road shows
to attract investment into their respective states.
Commerce and Industry Minister, Shri Kamal Nath and
Minister for Health and Family Welfare Dr. A Ramadoss
participated in the Chatham House Conference ‘ The
Pharmaceutical Industry in the 21st Century: Is India
challenging the R&D Business model?

programmes: Trade & Investment Development
Programme with an outlay of Euros 14 million and the
India window of the Erasmus Mundus Scholarship
Programme, with an outlay of Euros 33 million. An MoU
for the India-EC Scholarship Programme was signed on 7
January 2005 in Brussels. The Customs Cooperation
Agreement, which was signed at the last Summit in New
Delhi in October 2003, was ratified and came into force
on 1 November 2004. The first round of negotiations for
India-EU Maritime Agreement between the two sides was
held in September 2004 in New Delhi.

United Kingdom
Relations between India and the UK continued to be very
close. Frequent high-level bilateral consultations over the
year helped to consolidate and advance cooperation in
diverse areas. During PM’s visit to London on 19-20
September 2004, UK Prime Minister Tony Blair described
the bilateral relationship as “probably the strongest it has
been today for many, many years. It is a relationship that
is actually going from strength to strength.” The two Prime
Ministers launched the joint declaration titled ‘India- UK:
Towards a New and Dynamic Partnership’, setting out
plans to strengthen and broaden bilateral ties through a
comprehensive strategic partnership. The Joint
Declaration laid the ground for setting up a Ministerially
led Joint Economic and Trade Committee (JETCO) to
strengthen the strategic economic relationship and an
Indo-UK Economic and Financial dialogue. The Prime
Minister addressed a breakfast meeting of chief executives
of select British firms and also held a meeting with the
parliamentarians from Labour Friends of India. External
Affairs Minister, NSA and Chairman, Planning
Commission accompanied PM.

Finance Minister (FM), Shri P Chidambaram delivered
the Keynote Address at the Advancing Enterprise 2005
Conference organized by Chancellor for Exchequer Mr.
Gordon Brown. The Indo-British Economic and Financial
Dialogue was launched during the visit and an agreement
to this effect was signed by FM and Chancellor of the
Exchequer Mr. Gordon Brown. He also launched the
Foreign Policy Centre’s new programme on ‘India and
Globalisation’. FM attended a breakfast meeting with G7 Finance Ministers, the first time that India was invited
to interact with them at one of their regular Group
meetings. Other high level visits from India included those
by Shri Somnath Chatterjee, Speaker Lok Sabha, Minister
for Human Resource Development, Shri Arjun Singh, Ms.
Kumari Selja, Minister of State for Urban Employment
and Poverty Alleviation. The 8th India-UK Round Table
meeting was held in Yorkshire, U.K. in February.

External Affairs Minister, Shri Natwar Singh had visited
UK earlier in June 2004 and met Foreign Secretary Jack
Straw with whom he had wide-ranging exchange of views
on international, regional and bilateral issues. There were
several other high-level bilateral visits strengthening and
expanding the scope of economic and commercial related
issues. Finance Minister Shri Chidambaram attended an
event titled ‘Passage to India’ in London on 8-9 October
in which several CEOs and prospective investors
participated. Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of Commerce &
Industries, during his visits to London in June and October,
met Ms Patricia Hewitt, Trade Secretary and discussed
issues of bilateral interest and WTO. He also inaugurated
a conference organized by FICCI-‘Invest India’ in October.
Shri Praful Patel, Minister of Civil Aviation visited and

There were visits to India by Deputy Prime Minister John
Prescott as PM’s Special Envoy, Defence Secretary
Geoffrey Hoon, Mr. David Milliband, Minister of State
for Education & Skills, Ms. Margaret Beckett, Cabinet
Minister and Secretary of State for Environment, Sir
Michael Jay, Permanent Under Secretary, CPFIN members
led by Peter Luff, MP, David Lammy, Parliamentary Under
81

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Secretary of State at the Department of Constitutional
Affairs, Sir Kevin Tebbit, KCB, CMG, Permanent Under
Secretary of State for Defence, Mr. Hillary Benn, Minister
for International Development, Mr. Gareth Thomas,
Junior Minister for International Development, Mr. Barry
Gardiner, Minister for Economy and Education in
Northern Ireland, Secretary for Trade and Industry, Ms.
Patricia Hewitt and Minister for Environment Mr. Elliot
Morley. British Foreign Secretary Mr. Jack Straw visited
India from 17 – 18 February . In Delhi he met External
Affairs Minister (EAM), Shri Natwar Singh and Home
Minister Shri Shivraj Patil. An Indo-UK Prisoner Transfer
Agreement (initialled in 1997) was signed during the visit
and the MoU on return of illegal immigrants was renewed
for a period of further one year. The discussions focused
on bilateral relations as well as developments in our
neighbourhood.

states (Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and
West Bengal). In October 2004, the UK announced
substantial assistance to support the Government of
India’s Sarv Shiksha Abhiyan Programme with a
commitment of £190 million over four years.

France
India and France enjoy cordial and substantive ties. The
tempo of regular and structured consultations on a variety
of issues of mutual concern continued in 2004. Late Shri
J.N. Dixit, then NSA to PM, led the Indian side at the
12th round of the Strategic Dialogue held in Paris on 23
August 2004. The French side was led by GourdaultMontagne, Diplomatic Advisor to the French President.
Issues pertaining to international security and bilateral
cooperation were discussed during the dialogue. Shri Dixit
also called on French President Jacques Chirac and the
French Foreign Minister, Michel Barnier.

The UK is India’s third largest trade partner after the USA
and China, and the largest in Europe. Annual bilateral
trade in goods and services between India and Britain was
well over £ 5 billion during 2003. Between January and
September 2004, total trade in goods registered a slight
increase at £3.29b in India’s favour. India has moved up,
as UK’s 15th most important export market. The UK
continues to be the largest cumulative investor in India
and the third largest investor post-1991. India is the eighth
largest investor in the UK in terms of the number of
projects and the second largest from Asia after Japan. The
total number of Indian companies in the UK stand
presently at 480. Prime Minister Blair and the Secretary
of State for Trade and Industry unambiguously supported
offshore-outsourcing by the British companies pointing
out the larger economic benefits to the UK. Air Services
talks were held in London in September between the
officials of Ministry of Civil Aviation and Department for
Transport and concluded successfully with an agreement
to increase the number of direct flights per week from 19
to 40 by both the sides in a phased manner over a period
of one year and also to increase the number of destinations
served in India to seven. The Annual CII CEO’s Mission
visited London in June. The third Financial TimesNasscom Annual conference on outsourcing was held in
London in November. The UK government’s programme
of development assistance to India continues to be its
largest in the world. The British Department for
International Development (DfID) plans to disburse £ 250
million to various programmes in India during 2004-05.
UK assistance is channelled to several nationwide
activities as well as to specific programmes in four focus

French Foreign Minister, Michel Barnier, visited India on
27-28 October 2004 and called on Prime Minister, Raksha
Mantri and Leader of the Opposition. External Affairs
Minister led the delegation level talks covering a wide
range of issues of mutual concern. The 6th meeting of
the Joint Working Group on Terrorism was held on 2 April
2004 in New Delhi.
French Senate President Christian Poncelet led a Senate
delegation to India from 3 - 5 February 2005. The
delegation included Senators Fauchon and Plancade, both
active members of the Indo-French Friendship Association
in the French Senate. The delegation called on the
President, Vice President, External Affairs Minister and
met the Members of the Standing Committee on External
Affairs. The delegation was also briefed by the National
Disaster Management Cell in the Ministry of Home
Affairs, on our relief and rehabilitation work following
the Tsunami, both in India as well as in the neighbouring
countries affected.
In the field of Defence, continuous exchanges between
the two sides were maintained during the year. The 7th
Round of the Indo -French High Level Defence
Committee meeting was held in Paris on 17-19 November
2004 at the level of Defence Secretary. The meetings of
the three sub-Committees established under this dialogue
mechanism were also held. In addition, the program of
exchange between the armed forces of both country
continued, with several incoming and outgoing visits at
senior staff officer level taking place. The 3rd Indo-French
Research Forum meeting was held in Paris from 18-21
82

Europe

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and British Prime Minister Mr. Tony Blair jointly addressing the press in London,
19-20 September 2004.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting with German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder in New Delhi, 6-7 October 2004.

83

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

October, with the objective of furthering bilateral
cooperation in the field of defence joint ventures.

Group of the ICMR and INSERM on research cooperation
in the area of health was held in Paris on 24 March 2004.
The 33rd Meeting of the Scientific Council of the IndoFrench Centre for Promotion of Advanced Research
(CEFIPRA) was held on 3 and 4 May 2004 at Grenoble.

The year witnessed continued growth in bilateral trade
between India and France. The figure touched 2.5 billion
Euros in 2003-04, with the balance of trade being
marginally in India’s favor. The Joint Working Groups on
Energy, Roads, Urban Development and Mineral
Exploration & Development met during the year to
deliberate upon ways of fostering cooperation in their
respective sectors. The visits of Minister for Commerce
& Industry, Shri Kamal Nath; Minister for Toursim, Smt.
Renuka Chowdhury; Minister of Communication and
Information Technology, Shri Dayanidhi Maran; Minister
of State for Food Processing Industries, Shri Subodh Kant
Sahai contributed to sustaining high level interaction in
the economic sphere. The visit of the high-level CII-CEOs
delegation sponsored by the Confederation of Indian
Industry, India’s participation in trade fairs such as Foire
de Paris, Pret-à-Porter, Cannes Water Symposium, Salon
International de l’Alimentation (SIAL) as well as BuyerSeller Meets for leather, fashion apparels and seminars
on Information Technology and Business Opportunities
in the Indian Agro Food Sector enhanced business
interaction between the two countries.

Italy
India’s relations with Italy received a strong impetus with
the State Visit of Italian President, Mr. Carlo Azeglio
Ciampi from 12-16 February 2005. He was accompanied
by Mr. Gianfranco Fini, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Antonio Marzano, Minister for Productive Activities, Mr.
Giuliano Urbani, Minister for Culture, Ms. Letizia Moratti,
Minister for Education, University and Education, Mrs.
Margherita, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and a
high-level business and media delegation.
President Ciampi held delegation level talks with PM. The
talks focussed on possibilities for further co-operation in
the fields of trade and commerce, culture, S&T, Space
and related areas. Six Agreements were signed after the
talks: an MoU on Political Cooperation, an MoU on
Fishery and Aqua-culture Production, an MoU on
Cooperation for the Conservation of Paintings of the
Ajanta and Ellora Caves, an MoU between the Indian
Ministry of S &T and Italian Ministry for Education,
University and Research, Programme of Cooperation for
the years 2005-07 under the Indo-Italian S&T Agreement
and an Agreement between ISRO and Italian Space
Agency on the Cooperation in Space, Science, Technology
and Applications. A further six technical MoUs in the
field of bioinformatics, neuroinformatics, Information
Sciences & Applicable Mathematics, Information and
Communication Technology, Micro-Electro-Mechanical
Systems and Emerging Web Applications were signed
between the centres of excellence on both sides during
the visit.

In the fields of Science & Technology the two sides
continued to maintain the momentum of bilateral
cooperation. In the area of Space, the major bilateral
project established is the MEGHA-TROPIQUES satellite
development program, in respect of which an MoU was
signed in November 2004 between ISRO and CNES. The
satellite is now scheduled for launch on an Indian launcher
by 2008-2009. An ISRO-CNES Joint Working Group for
Space has also been constituted. On 16 September 2004,
an MoU was signed between DAE and the ‘Commissariat
à l’Energy Atomique’ (CEA). The 2nd session of the IndoFrench Joint Committee on Atomic Energy was held in
Mumbai from 8-11 November 2004. An MoU was signed
between the Indian and the French Railways in Paris on
30 January 2004.

President Ciampi’s discussions with Rashtrapatiji focused
on intensification of Scientific and Technological
exchanges with increased emphasis on joint projects in
areas of core competencies. Other important events
organized during his visit were an Italy-India Business
Forum jointly organized by CII, FICCI and
CONFINDUSTRIA at Pragati Maidan and an art
Exhibition ‘Italian Art 1950-69, Masterpieces from the
Farnesina Collection’.

A meeting of the Coordinators of the Indo-French Forum
was held in Paris on 3 May 2004. An Indian Film Festival
“Did you say Bollywood”, organized by the prestigious
Centre Pompidou in collaboration with the Embassy was
a great success. 16 ICCR scholarships were awarded to
French nationals under the 2004-2005 Cultural Exchange
Programme. The 5th meeting of the Industrial Research
Committee of IFCPAR was held in Mumbai on 16 and 17
December 2004. The 4th meeting of the Joint Working

Other high level visits from both sides in the course of
the year include those by Italian Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs, Ms. Margherita Boniver in July 2004
84

Europe

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh at India-European Union joint press conference following the 5th India-EU Summit at
The Hague on 8 November 2004.

President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam hosting Banquet Dinner in the honour of visiting President of Italy Mr. Carlo Azeglio Ciampi (12-16
February 2005). Seated to the right of President is Mrs. Franca Ciampi, wife of Italian President and on his left is Shrimati Gursharan
Kaur, wife of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh.

85

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

German companies. He called on Rashtrapatiji, Vice
President and had delegation level talks with PM. External
Affairs Minister called on Chancellor Schroeder. At the
delegation level talks with PM, the Chancellor expressed
deep interest for enhancing relationship with India as
envisaged in the Indo-German Partnership in the 21st
Century. Indo-German ‘Science Circle’ that links research
institutes and scientists on both sides through a website
was inaugurated by the Chancellor. An MoU for Scientific
Cooperation was signed by DST and Max Planck Institute
to further bilateral cooperation in science and technology.
Both the sides shared the view of the need for reform of
the UN and reiterated to support each other’s candidature
in an expanded UNSC. The two sides decided to double
bilateral trade from about $ 5 billion in 2003 over the
next five years.

during which a new Indo- Italian Cultural Agreement was
signed and an Alitalia flight was started on Milan-Delhi
sector; Minister of State for Tourism Smt. Renuka
Choudhury in September 2004 to promote India as a
tourist destination in Italy; Italian Minister of State for
Agriculture Mr. Paolo Scarpa Bonazza Buaro from 6-7
December 2004; Italian Minister for Productive Activities
from 4-7 January 2005 for the 16th Session of the IndoItalian Joint Economic Commission and Speaker of the
Italian Lower House, Mr. Pier Ferdinando Casini from 1214 January 2005.
Smt. Preneet Kaur, Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha)
and Smt. Jaya Bachchan, Member of Parliament (Rajya
Sabha) visited Rome from 16-18 October 2004 for
attending the World Conference of Women
Parliamentarians for protection of children and young
persons.

German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer visited India
earlier on 14 July 2004 and called on PM. External Affairs
Minister led the delegation level talks where, in a strategic
move, both India and Germany agreed to support each
other’s candidature for permanent membership in an
expanded UNSC. He reiterated the importance of a joint
coordinated approach to the issue of UN Reform,
especially the UNSC. Finance Minister Eichel visited India
on 14-15 October 2004 at the invitation of Finance
Minister Shri P. Chidambaram to discuss G-20 related
issues. Both the Ministers agreed to make concerted efforts
to intensify bilateral economic cooperation and double
bilateral trade, which currently stands at Euro 6 billion
(final figures of 2004 awaited). On 20-21 November 2004,
Finance Minister Shri P. Chidambaram and RBI Governor
Shri Y. V. Reddy participated in the G-20 Ministerial
meeting in Berlin. Finance Minister addressed an Investors
Meet in Frankfurt on 22 November 2004. Mrs. Sheila
Dikshit, Chief Minister of Delhi, accompanied by senior
officials participated in the International Conference for
Renewable Energies in Bonn (1-4 June 2004).

The Embassy, with the support of Commune di Roma and
the Indo-Italian Chamber of Commerce & Industry,
organized a series of India-centric events called “Namaste
India” in Rome from 9-18 July 2004. The Namaste India
in Rome focussed on fashion, cinema, films, food, tourism
and other related sectors of commercial importance to
India.

Ireland
Ireland held the European Union (EU) Presidency during
the first half of 2004 during which a meeting of India’s
Head of Missions based in EU member states chaired by
Foreign Secretary was held in Dublin from 14-15 April
2004. The meeting was also addressed by Secretary
General of the Irish Department of Foreign Affairs.
A 5-member delegation from Irish Joint Parliamentary
Committee on Justice, Equality, Defence and Women
Rights led by its Chairman, Mr. Sean Ardagh visited India
from 18-25 October 2004. The Delegation met
Chairperson of Parliamentary Committee on
Empowerment of Women, Chairperson of Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment,
Minister of State for Home Affairs and Delhi Chief
Minister.

Chief Justice of India(CJI), Shri R.C. Lahoti, led the
Indian delegation to the International Law Association
Conference held in Berlin, 15-21 August 2004. CJI cochaired the plenary session on corporate social
responsibility and international law. On 10-11 November
2004 Shri Om Prakash Chautala, Chief Minister of
Haryana visited Munich with a high level delegation to
promote Haryana as tourism and investment destination.
Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister of State (Independent
Charge) for Overseas Indian Affairs visited Germany and
met NRIs and PIOs on 10-12 October 2004. Foreign

Germany
Chancellor Schroeder visited India on 6-7 October 2004
as part of annual summit level interactions. He was
accompanied by Ms. Edelgard Bulmahn, Federal Minister
for Education and Research, a high level official delegation
and a twenty-two member delegation of CEOs of leading
86

Europe

Luxembourg

Secretary, Shri Shashank led the Indian delegation to the
Third International Conference on Afghanistan held in
Berlin on 31 March –1 April 2004. FS also had discussions
with German Secretary of State, Jürgen Chrobog. Defence
Secretary, Shri Ajay Prasad led a composite delegation
comprising representatives of armed, air and naval forces
to Berlin and Munich on 4-8 April 2004. German Defence
Secretary Dr. Peter Eickenboom paid a return visit heading
a composite delegation from 5-8 December 2004 and held
discussions with the Defence Secretary. Earlier, from 1017 August 2004, a delegation led by Lt. General Friedrich
Reichmann, Commander, Joint Operations Command of
Germany, visited India. Dr. Beate Merk, Bavarian Justice
Minister visited India from 31 August –6 September 2004.
Minister-President of Hessen Mr. Roland Koch headed a
business and official delegation to India from 1-8 February
2005. During the visit he interacted with high-level Union
and State dignitaries and attended important business
interaction.

India’s relations with Luxembourg remained warm and
friendly. Discussions were held between the Indian and
Luxembourg authorities for the commencement of
negotiations on bilateral Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement. Luxembourg assumed the residency of the
EU from 1 January 2005 for 6 months. Talks were held
with Luxembourg Chamber of Commerce in preparation
of a Trade Mission to India in 2005. Luxembourg assumed
EU Presidency for the first half of 2005.

The Netherlands
India-Netherlands relations continued to be cordial and
friendly. The highlight of the year was the Fifth India-EU
Summit held in The Hague on 8 November 2004 during
the Dutch Presidency of the EU. Prime Minister led the
Indian delegation for the Summit and took opportunity
of his visit to The Hague to call on Queen Beatrix.
External Affairs Minister held a bilateral meeting with
the Dutch Foreign Minister Dr Bernard R. Bot and
Commerce & Industry Minister Shri Kamal Nath met his
Dutch counterpart Ms Karien van Gennip. The trade and
investment showed satisfactory growth during the year.
The Netherlands remained among the top seven partners
of India both in terms of the volume of bilateral trade at $
1.8 billion, in India’s favour, as well as of the foreign direct
investment into India. A 17-member joint CII/ FICCI
business delegation visited the Netherlands. The visit
coincided with the India-EU Business Interactions on 8
November 2004. In the consular field, one notable
development was the Indian decision to join The Hague
Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legalization
for Foreign Public Document under the Hague Conference
of Private International Law. This accession would remove
the legalization requirement for Indian documents like
birth and marriage certificates before their use in the
Netherlands and in all other member countries of the
Hague Convention.

In the first half of February, two Parliamentary delegations,
one from the Indo-German Friendship Group in the
German Parliament headed by Mr. Sebastian Edathy and
a second from the German Association of Trade Fair
Industries that included three German MPs, visited India.
Another important delegation in February was of
representatives of German SMEs who visited Delhi and
Mumbai and interacted with Indian business and industry.

Belgium
India’s relations with Belgium remained warm and friendly.
External Affairs Minister, Shri Natwar Singh, visited
Brussels from 12-14 September 2004 and had a wideranging exchange of views with Belgian Foreign Minister,
Mr. Karel de Gucht covering bilateral, multilateral and
regional issues. It was decided to establish an ad hoc
dialogue on consular issues of mutual concern. Belgium
is India’s second largest trade partner within the European
Union with bilateral trade turnover crossing Euro 6 billion
for the year 2004. The Belgo-Indian Chamber of
Commerce (BICC) celebrated its Golden Jubilee on 8
November 2004 with a Seminar entitled “India-Target
2005” which was graced by the presence of HRH Prince
Philippe of Belgium. A delegation from the Belgian Senate
Commission on Finance paid a visit to India in the first
and second week of January 2005 and interacted with
MPs in Indian Parliament, state functionaries in
Karnataka and Maharashtra as well as Indian business
representatives.

Portugal
India and Portugal celebrated the 30th Anniversary of
re-establishment of diplomatic relations on 31 December
2004. On this occasion messages of felicitations were
exchanged between Rashtrapatiji and Portuguese
President, Dr. Jorge Sampaio and between External Affairs
Minister and Portuguese Foreign Minister, Dr. António
Victor Martins Monteiro reiterating the bonds of
friendship and a mutual desire to strengthen bilateral
relations. Bilateral relations were marked by a regular
87

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Meets in leather and apparel sector were organized by
the Mission in collaboration with the respective export
promotion Councils. The Growing interest of Spaniards
in Indian culture and heritage was evident in the form of
enhanced tourism and overwhelming response to Indian
cultural events. Tourism from Spain to India is likely to
touch a figure of 38,000 by the end of this year. On the
cultural side, an important Puppet Festival was organized
in the north of Spain in November. India was the theme
country for this festival, which also included depiction of
various other Indian arts and cuisine. India’s initiative of
setting up of Casa de la India [India Cultural Centre]
received a significant boost with the visit of DG (ICCR)
who, on behalf of ICCR, presented a cheque of US $
50,000 to Casa de la India.

exchange of high-level visits. Kumari Selja, Minister of
State for Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
(Independent Charge) visited Portugal from 17-20
September 2004 and met with the Secretary of State of
Social Security and the Minister of Cities, Local
Administration, Housing and Regional Development and
visited two Social Housing Projects. Minister of State for
Overseas Indians Affairs Shri Jagdish Tytler paid a visit
on 7 October 2004 to Lisbon and held discussions with
various associations of Indian nationals as well as people
of Indian origin in preparation of the Pravasi Bharatiya
Divas to be organized in Mumbai. The Indian Naval Ship
INS TABAR visited Lisbon for four days (18-21 April
2004) on her maiden passage from Kaliningrad, Russia to
Mumbai. Indo-Portuguese bilateral trade stood at $ 166
million, in India’s favor. As part of trade promotion
activities ITPO coordinated India’s participation in the
International Handicrafts Fair held at Lisbon (26 June–4
July 2004) where about 40 Indian companies participated.
India participated as the theme country in the 27th
Portuguese National Handicrafts Fair (24 July– 8 August
2004) at the invitation of the Mayor of Vila do Conde.
The Export Promotion Council for Handicrafts, which
coordinated India’s participation, put up a colourful and
attractive theme pavilion which, eventually turned out
to be the focus of the exhibition.

The Commonwealth
Commonwealth Secretary General, Mr. Don McKinnon,
visited India in October 2004, in connection with PreCHOGM 2005 consultations with various
Commonwealth Head of Government. He met PM and
External Affairs Minister and discussed Commonwealthrelated issues, including the format of the next CHOGM
in Malta in November 2005. He emphasized that India’s
technical cooperation should be increased in a manner
that reflected India’s growing stature internationally. India
continues to be the fifth largest contributor to
Commonwealth budgets and has decided to increase its
annual contribution to the Commonwealth Small States
Office in New York to US$35,000. India also remains one
of the largest contributors to the CFTC, with an annual
contribution of GBP 720,000. It continued its active
membership of key Commonwealth bodies, including
CMAG and the Committee on Terrorism, as well as the
Executive Committee of the Commonwealth Secretariat’s
Board of Governors and Commonwealth Foundation and
participated actively during its meetings. During 2004,
India chaired the Accreditation Committee of the
Commonwealth, which is constituted to recommend
accreditation of NGOs to the Commonwealth for
participation in CHOGM 2005. A Conference of
Commonwealth Chief Election Officers was held in New
Delhi on 24-25 February 2005.

Spain
Spain is an important partner for India in the European
Union. Our relations remained warm and close with the
new Government of José Rodríguez Zapatero, Prime
Minister of the socialist coalition. There were important
visits during 2004. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury, Minister of
State (Independent Charge) for Tourism visited Spain
from 5-8 October 2004. Apart from addressing a road
show organized by the India Tourist office, Paris, Minister
of State (Tourism) called on Mr. José Montilla Aguilera,
Spanish Minister of Industry, Tourism and Commerce.
Bilateral issues such as organizing reciprocal country
festivals, commencement of direct flight between the two
countries and forging cooperation in important sectors
like hotel chains and infrastructure building were
discussed. Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister of State (Overseas
Indians’ Affairs) visited Spain from 5-7 October 2004 and
interacted with the local Indian community. Bilateral
commercial ties strengthened considerably during this
period. Bilateral trade was significantly in India’s favor
with Indian exports crossing $1.5 billion in 2004.
Important investment promotion events and Buyer Seller

EUROPE II
India has traditionally enjoyed friendly and substantive
relations with 29 countries of the Europe-II Division that
came into existence in March 2004. The year under review
saw epochal changes in the eco-political geometry of the
88

Europe

region. On 2 April 2004, seven East European countries,
viz. Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia joined the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation (NATO). A month later, the European
Union was enlarged to take ten more Member States in
east and south of the Continent, viz. Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta,
Poland, Slovak Republic and Slovenia. By the year-end,
the EU decided that Bulgaria and Romania were on track
to join the body in 2007/2008. The EU also decided to
commence accession negotiations with Croatia and
Turkey. The EU being our largest trading partner and
source of investment, the ongoing changes had direct
implications for India.

During the visit, following bilateral documents were
signed:
i)
Agreement on Infrastructure Cooperation in Health
Sector;
ii)

Memorandum of Understanding on Development
of Collaboration between the Post Graduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh and the Medical University Innsbruck.

The bilateral engagements during the year also included
meetings in Brussels between the External Affairs Minister
and the Foreign Minister of Austria in early September
2004, visit of the Chief of Army Staff in August 2004,
visit of a Ministerial delegation from Andhra Pradesh in
August 2004 as well as the third round of Foreign Office
Consultations held in end November 2004 in Vienna.

Albania

While Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas Shri Mani
Shankar Aiyar’s visit to Vienna in September 2004 was
in the multilateral context, he also discussed bilateral
possibilities with his Austrian counterparts.

India and Albania appointed Honorary Consul Generals
in each other’s capitals during 2004.

Austria
President of Austria, Dr. Heinz Fischer paid a State visit
to India on 16-21 February 2005. During this
unprecedented visit, the Austrian President was
accompanied by a high level delegation, including Mrs.
Fischer, Federal Minister for Economics and Labour Mr.
Martin Bartenstein, Chief Minister of Tyrol Mr. Herwig
Van Staa, the Chief Minister of Salzburg Mrs. Gabriele
Burgstaller and President of Austrian Federal Economic
Chamber Mr. Christoph Leitl. The large number of
businessmen and a significant science and culture
delegation accompanying the President during the State
visit underscored the importance the two countries attach
to expanding their economic relations. During the visit,
Dr. Fischer met the President of India Dr. Abdul Kalam
and held talks with the Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh. President Fischer held separate meetings with the
Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha, the External
Affairs Minister and the Defence Minister. President
Fischer also had a meeting with Smt. Sonia Gandhi,
Chairperson, UPA. President Fischer and accompanying
delegation visited Mumbai, Hyderabad, Bangalore and
Mysore. In Delhi and Mumbai, President Fischer
addressed captains of Indian business and industry, in
particular the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), the
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
(FICCI). Federal Minister Bartenstein, the Chief Ministers
and the President of the Economic Chamber also had
separate discussions. The visit provided a fillip to the
traditionally warm and substantive bilateral ties.

Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Rao Inderjit
Singh visited Austria for the State funeral of late Austrian
President Thomas Klestil in July 2004. On the sidelines
of the engagements, the Minister had meetings with new
Austrian President, Chancellor and Foreign Minister.
In September 2004, Ministry of Civil Aviation granted
conditional permission to Austrian Airlines’ request to
operate Vienna-Mumbai flights in addition to their current
flights to Delhi.
The 10th session of the Indo-Austrian Joint Economic
Commission Meeting was held in Vienna during 17-18
January 2004. The meeting will further strengthen our
growing economic and commercial ties.

Bosnia-Herzegovina (BiH)
The Minister of State for Tourism Smt. Renuka
Chowdhury paid an official visit to BiH from 29 October
- 1 November 2004 during which the President of the
Republic received her.
India sent two consignments of humanitarian assistance
worth US$ 50,000 (nearly Rs. 22 lakhs) to flood victims
of Tuzla Canton of BiH in early 2004.

Bulgaria
Bulgarian Foreign Minister Dr. Solomon Passy began a
two day visit to India on 28 July 2004, during which he
was accompanied by Deputy Ministers of Foreign Affairs,
89

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Cyprus

Defence and Agriculture, and some Members of Bulgarian
Parliament. During the visit, the Foreign Minister had
comprehensive exchange of views with the External
Affairs Minister. He also paid courtesy calls on
Rashtrapatiji and Defence Minister. The visiting dignitary
reiterated Bulgaria’s support for India’s candidature for a
permanent seat in the expanded UN Security Council
and expressed interest in coordinating positions on
terrorism. An MoU on mutual cooperation between the
Foreign Service Institute, Ministry of External Affairs,
India and the Diplomatic Institute of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Bulgaria was also signed.

Mr. Sotos Zackheos, Cyprus Permanent Secretary for
Foreign Affairs visited India on 4-7 November 2004 for
the second round of Foreign Office Consultations with
Indian side led by Smt. Shashi U. Tripathi, Secretary
(West). Mr. Zackheos also had a courtesy meeting with
External Affairs Minister to whom he delivered a letter
of invitation from Mr. George Iacovou, Cyprus Foreign
Minister. He also met the President of NASSCOM.

Czech Republic
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Transport, Mr.
Milan Simonovsky visited India during 8-12 February 2005
and attended the IETF-2005, New Delhi. Mr. Simonovsky
also met the Deputy Chairman of the Planning
Commission and the Minister of Heavy Industries &
Public Enterprises.

The 15th Session of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission
for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation was
held in Delhi during 17-20 November 2004. Bulgarian
Minister for Agriculture and Forestry, Mr. Mehmed Dikme
led the Bulgarian delegation, which also included Deputy
Ministers of Economy, Transport & Communications and
Youth & Sports. Shri Sharad Pawar, Agriculture Minister
led the Indian delegation. A session of the bilateral Joint
Business Council was also held.

The Union Minister of State for Environment and Forests
Shri Namo Narain Meena visited Prague on 25-27
November 2004 to attend a multilateral meeting on follow
up of the Montreal Protocol.

The Third Session of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Committee
on Science & Technology met on 1-2 November 2004. It
was co-chaired by Prof. Kamen Velev, Deputy Minister of
Education & Science of Bulgaria and Prof. V.S.
Ramamurthy, India’s Secretary (Science & Technology).
During the session, the Protocol of Cooperation in Science
& Technology for the period 2005-07 was signed.

The Sixth session of India-Czech Republic Joint
Committee was held in New Delhi on 16-17 December
2004. It was co-chaired by Czech Deputy Minister of
Industry and Trade Mr. Miroslav Somol, and on Indian
side by Shri S.N. Menon, Commerce Secretary.
A number of cultural events including unveiling of a bust
of Gurudev Rabindra Nath Tagore and a Festival of Indian
Films were held in Prague during 2004.

Golden Jubilee of the establishment of the Indo- Bulgarian
diplomatic relations was observed in December 2004.
Congratulatory messages were exchanged between the
Presidents, Prime Ministers and Foreign Ministers of the
two countries. A string of cultural events, symposia,
conferences and postal commemorations were held in
both countries to mark this occasion.

Denmark
Danish Deputy Prime Minster Bendtsen visited India from
12-17 October 2004 during which he inaugurated an
Inland Container Terminal in Dadri (UP). Danish
Minister for Science, Technology and Innovation Mr.
Helge Sander visited India on 25-29 October 2004 during
which a bilateral MoU on biotechnology cooperation was
signed. A 6 member delegation of Danish Parliament’s
Foreign Affairs Committee visited India on 3-8 November
2004 during which it interacted with Indian Parliament’s
Standing Committee on External Affairs.

Croatia
The First meeting of Indo-Croat Joint Committee on
combating international illegal drugs and psychotropic
substances, international terrorism and organized crime
was held in Zagreb on 8-9 September 2004.
After a gap of 6 years, ITPO organised participation of 14
Indian companies in the 80th Annual Zagreb International
Autumn Fair 2004.

Finland
Mr. Erkki Tuomioja, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Finland
paid a visit to India from 6-10 February 2005 in connection
with a meeting on Helsinki Process held in New Delhi.
He had a meeting with the External Affairs Minister.

ICCR-sponsored visit of a 16-member Puppet Group to
Croatia from 20-23 December 2004.
90

Europe

Ms. Paula Lehtomaki, Minister of Foreign Trade and
Development of Finland visited India from 1-9 February
2005. She was accompanied by a large business delegation.
She had meetings with Minister of Commerce & Industry
and other Ministers. She also participated in sectoral
interactions between businessmen of India and Finland
in New Delhi and Bangalore.

The Sixth Session of Indo-Hungarian Foreign Office
Consultations was held in New Delhi on 31 January 2005.
Deputy State Secretary in the Hungarian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Laszlo Varkonyi visited India for this
purpose from 30 January – 2 February 2005.

Malta
At the invitation of the External Affairs Minister, Dr.
Michael Frendo, Foreign Minister of Malta paid an Official
visit to India from 7-12 March 2005. During the visit, Dr.
Frendo held discussions with the External Affairs Minister
on ways to boost bilateral ties. He also interacted with
Indian entrepreneurs.

Finnish Under Secretary of State for External Economic
Relations Mr. Pekka Lintu visited India during 7-10 June
2004. The visit was utilized to hold extensive interactions
with officials of Indian Ministries of External Affairs and
Commerce as well as the captains of Indian business in
Delhi, Bangalore and Chennai.

Moldova

A 75-member Indian Air Force Band team visited Finland
from 1-8 August 2004 to participate at the Hamina Tattoo
International Military Music Festival.

For the first time, a Moldavian Chambers of Commerce
delegation visited India International Trade Fair organized
in New Delhi in November 2004.

Greece
Norway

Over 80 Indian athletes participated in the 28th Olympic
Games held in Athens during 13-29 August 2004. Major
R.S. Rathore won a Silver medal in the shooting event.
An official delegation led by Minister of Youth Affairs and
Sports, Shri Sunil Dutt, visited Athens during the period
of the Olympics. Later, in the Paralympics also held in
Athens during 17-28 September 2004, India’s Devendra
won a Gold Medal for Javelin throw while Rajender Singh
won a Bronze Medal for Power Lifting.

Minister of Foreign Affairs Mr. Jan Petersen paid an official
visit to India on 6 July 2004, during which he had
comprehensive exchange of views with the External
Affairs Minister. The two Foreign Ministers signed a
bilateral agreement to establish a Joint Commission of
Cooperation. The visiting dignitary also held discussions
with Minister of Commerce & Industry and the National
Security Adviser.
Norwegian Minister of Trade & Industry Mr. Borge Brende
visited India from 2-8 February 2005, accompanied by a
nearly 60-strong business delegation. The visiting
dignitary had a number of engagements apart from
meeting the Minister of Commerce & Industry. He also
attended a number of bilateral business events in New
Delhi, Bangalore and Mumbai.

Hungary
Hungarian Minister of National Cultural Heritage Mr.
Istvan Hiller visited India from 22-25 November 2004.
He, along with Minister of Information, Broadcasting &
Culture Shri Jaipal Reddy inaugurated Hungarian Week
of Culture in New Delhi.
Dr. Andras Balogh, Chief Advisor to Hungarian PM on
International Strategy visited India from 17-27 November
2004 to participate in a Seminar on Panchsheel.

Norwegian State Secretary, Mr. Vidar Helgesen paid a
bilateral official visit to India from 11-15 October 2004.
During the visit, the State Secretary held bilateral
discussions with the Minister of State for External Affairs
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh. He also called on Human
Resource Development Minister Shri Arjun Singh.
Norwegian State Secretary for Development Cooperation
Mr. Olav Kjørven also paid an official visit to India on 78 September 2004 during which he met with the Minister
of State for External Affairs Shri E. Ahamed and the
Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission Dr. M.S.
Ahluwalia.

Shri Lakshmi Chand, Secretary (Industrial Policy and
Promotion) visited Hungary on 29 March 2004 to initial
the revised Agreement on Economic Cooperation.
The first meeting of the Indo-Hungarian Joint Working
Group on Education was held in Budapest, 2-4 November
2004.
India’s knowledge -based enterprises continued to
strengthen their presence in Hungary with two new
establishments opened during the year.

The Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs of Norwegian
91

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Prince Radu of Hohenzollern-Veringen, Special
Representative of the Government of Romania and his
spouse Princess Margarita visited India during 7-12
November 2004, on the invitation of the Governor of
Maharashtra. In Delhi they also called on the Minister of
State for External Affairs, Shri Rao Inderjit Singh.

Parliament visited India from 21-26 January 2005. During
their visit the delegation had meetings with the Speaker,
Lok Sabha, External Affairs Minister and members of the
Standing Committee on External Affairs in the Indian
Parliament.

Poland

An “Indian Business Alliance of Romania” was established
in Bucharest to co-ordinate and promote trade and
investment co-operation with Romania. A major Indian
Textile Exhibition was held in Bucharest and Brasov in
end April 2004.

Marshal of Polish Sejm, Mr. Josef Olesky led a
Parliamentary delegation for a three-day visit to India from
9 December 2004. Apart from meeting with the Speaker,
Lok Sabha, the visiting dignitary was also received by
Rashtrapatiji, Vice-President and the External Affairs
Minister. Mr. Oleksy handed over a letter to Rashtrapatiji
from Polish President Kwasniewski inviting him to visit
Poland in 2005.

A Regional Conference of Hindi Scholars of Central
Europe was held at the Sapientia-Hungarian University
of Transylvania, Miercurea Ciuc, in July 2004.

Raksha Mantri Shri Pranab Mukherjee paid a three-day
official visit to Poland from 30 October 2004 during which
he held useful discussions with Polish dignitaries including
the President, the Prime Minister and the Defence
Minister. A number of bilateral visits by defence
functionaries also took place during the year.

Serbia and Montenegro (SCG)
Minister of State for Science & Technology and Ocean
Development Shri Kapil Sibal paid an official visit to
Serbia & Montenegro on 27-30 October 2004. Shri Kapil
Sibal met with the President and the Foreign Minister of
Serbia and Montenegro and the Minister for Science of
the Republic of Serbia. A bilateral Agreement on Scientific
and Technological Cooperation was also signed.

India and Poland commemorated the Golden Jubilee of
establishment of bilateral diplomatic relations by exchange
of official messages and cultural functions, etc.

Minister of State for Tourism, Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
paid an official visit to Serbia & Montenegro on 1-4
November 2004. She inaugurated “Days of Indian
Festival” and had meetings with SCG Ministers of Foreign
Affairs and International Economic Relations as well as
the Serbian Minister of Tourism and Culture. A
Memorandum of Understanding on Tourism Cooperation
between India and Republic of Serbia was signed during
the visit.

Following Poland’s accession to the European Union, India
initiated bilateral consultations with Poland on a new
bilateral trade agreement. A large number of trade
delegations also visited Poland during the year.

Romania
Minister of Communications & IT Shri Dayanidhi Maran
led an Indian delegation to the 23 rd Congress of the
Universal Postal Union held in Bucharest from 19-22
September 2004. On the sidelines of the Congress, he
discussed bilateral cooperation with his Romanian
counterpart Ms. Adriana Ticau.

Minister of Economy and Privatization of the Republic of
Serbia Mr. Predrag Bubalo paid to visit India during 31
January – 3 February 2005 at the invitation of Minister of
State for Commerce and Industry.

An Indian delegation led by Shri Ajay Prasad, Defence
Secretary visited Bucharest from 8-10 April 2004. During
the visit, the delegation called on Acting Defence Minister
George Cristian Maior. The delegation also exchanged
views on further bilateral defence cooperation with
Secretary of State for Defence Gheorge Matache, and
Secretary of State for Economy & Commerce Gen. Dr.
Decebal Ilina.

Mr. Dusan Crnogorcevic, Assistant Minister
(International Bilateral Cooperation), SCG Ministry of
Foreign Affairs visited India on 2 December 2004 for the
fourth round of India-SCG Foreign Office Consultations.
The Indian side was chaired by Smt. Shashi U. Tripathi,
Secretary (West). The visiting SCG official also called on
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for External
Affairs.

Justice P.V. Reddy of the Supreme Court of India visited
Bucharest from 19-21 May 2004 for the 12 th Annual
International Justice Conference.

The 4th round of Foreign Office Consultations was held
in New Delhi on 2 December 2004. Assistant Foreign
92

Europe

Minister of Serbia and Montenegro (SCG) Mr. Dusan
Crnogorcevic and Secretary (West) led the two sides
respectively in the Consultations. Mr. Crnogorcevic also
called on Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Rao
Inderjit Singh.

India included naming of a street in New Delhi after great
Slovak leader Mr. Alexander Dubcek and addressing apex
chambers in New Delhi and Mumbai. In a Joint Statement
issued at the end of the visit, the Slovak side expressed
support for India’s candidature to the permanent seat in
the expanded UN Security Council.

Sweden

The Fifth Session of the Indo-Slovak Joint Committee
on Economic and Commercial Cooperation was held in
Bratislava during 18-19 October 2004. The session was
co-chaired by the Director General of Foreign Trade on
the Indian side and the Director General of Trade and
Customer Protection from the Slovak side. The bilateral
trade stood at US$ 27 million in 2003-04.

A delegation of Swedish Defence Commission visited
India on 2-7 November 2004. During this first-ever visit,
the delegation was received by Parliament’s Standing
Committee on Defence as well as senior officials in
Ministries of Defence and External Affairs.
A 20-member delegation of Sweden’s Parliamentary
Committee on Constitution visited India from 19-25
February 2005.

Slovenia
The fifth session of Indo–Slovenian Joint Committee on
Trade and Economic Cooperation was held in Ljubljana
on 21-22 April 2004. Shri G.K. Pillai, Additional Secretary
in Ministry of Commerce & Industry led the Indian
delegation and Ms. Renata Vitez, State Secretary for
Foreign Economic Relation in the Ministry of Economy
led the Slovenian side.

Mr. Hans Dahlgren, State Secretary in the Foreign
Ministry visited India from 8-10 December 2004. He
handed over to the External Affairs Minister, two replicas
of the Nobel Medal for Literature awarded to Gurudev
Rabindranath Tagore which was stolen from Vishwa
Bharati Museum. He also called on the National Security
Adviser. The fourth round of the Indo-Swedish Foreign
Office Consultations was held on 9 December 2004 in
New Delhi. The Indian and Swedish sides were
respectively led by Smt. Shashi U. Tripathi, Secretary
(West) and the Mr. Hans Dahlgren.

Switzerland
On invitation from Raksha Mantri, Switzerland’s Federal
Councillor for Defense, Sports and Civil Protection and
Vice-President Mr. Samuel Schmid paid an official visit
to India from 27 November – 1 December 2004. This was
the first official visit by Swiss Defence Minister to India.
Apart from detailed discussions with Raksha Mantri, the
visiting dignitary was also received by Rashtrapatiji.

Mr. Lars-Olof Lindgren, Director-General (Trade Policy)
in the Swedish Foreign Ministry led a business delegation
to India in October 2004. Mr. Lindgren called on the
Minister of Commerce & Industry, as well as the Minister
of Communications & IT.

The ninth session of Indo-Swiss Joint Commission was
held in New Delhi on 8 December 2004. The two
delegations were led by Shri Abhijit Sengupta, Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Commerce & Industry and
Ambassador Jorg Reding, Head of Bilateral Economic
Relations. Bilateral trade relations registered a steady
growth to reach US$ 3.75 billion in the last year.

Slovak Republic
At the invitation of Rashtrapatiji, President of Slovak
Republic, Dr. Ivan Gasparovic began a five-day State Visit
to India on 11 December 2004. He was accompanied by
Slovak First Lady Madame Silvia Gasparovicova, State
Secretaries of Economy, Defence and Foreign Affairs as
well as a large business delegation. Dr. Gasparovic met
Rashtrapatiji and held delegation-level talks with the
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh. He also had
courtesy call meetings with the Vice President, External
Affairs Minister, and the Minister of Commerce &
Industry. During the visit, three bilateral documents
pertaining to Economic Cooperation, Cultural Exchange
Programme and Cooperation in Small Scale Industries
were signed. Slovak President’s other engagements in

Turkey
Gen. Sukru Sariisik, Secretary General of the Turkish
National Security Council visited India during 4-9 April
2004 and met the National Security Adviser, Mr. Brajesh
Mishra, Chairman, Chiefs of Staff Committee, Admiral
Madhavendra Singh, Army Chief, Gen. N.C.Vij, Foreign
Secretary, Shri Shashank and the Deputy National
Security Adviser, Shri Satish Chandra. The visit enabled
both sides to exchange views on bilateral, regional and
93

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

international issues of common concern and contributed
to greater mutual understanding of respective security and
geo-strategic environment.

K. Ecvet Tezcan, Director General for Intelligence and
Research.
The first Session of the Indo-Turkish Joint Working Group
(JWG) of Economic Ministries was held in New Delhi
during 6-7 October 2004. During the meeting it was
agreed to set a bilateral trade target of US$ 2 billion by
2009, as compared to current value of US$ 1 billion. The
JWG identified a number of sectors, including food &
food processing, construction, textiles, automobiles,
electronics, pharmaceuticals, tourism, hydrocarbons, IT,
bio-tech, railways and leather for further cooperation.

Chairman, Chiefs of Staff Committee, Admiral
Madhavendra Singh paid a visit to Turkey from 10-15 May
2004 and had very positive interactions with his
counterpart, Chief of General Staff, General Ozkok and
other top brass of the Turkish armed forces.
The bilateral defence cooperation received a fillip from
four-day goodwill visits of two Indian Naval ships, INS
Ganga and INS Shakti to Istanbul port on 30 May 2004.
This was first such visit in seven years.

Indian exports to Turkey crossed US$ 1 billion mark for
the first time in 2004. In addition, 37 Turkish experts
availed of ITEC fellowships during the first seven months
of 2004. Bilateral people-to-people contacts were boosted
by a number of cultural events, food festivals and film
screening organised in Turkey.

The First Meeting of the Joint Working Group on
Combating Terrorism with Turkey was held during 1-2
June 2004. The Indian delegation was led by Smt. Meera
Shankar, Additional Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs
and the Turkish delegation was headed by Ambassador

94

The Americas

USA

8

relations with India were vital and had great potential.
Prime Minister underscored that mutual resolve to
strengthen bilateral relations would create the
environment of peace, prosperity and safety from
terrorism. They welcomed the implementation of Phase
1 of the Next Steps in Strategic Partnership (NSSP) to
include the removal of ISRO Headquarters from the
Commerce Department’s Entity List, as the beginning of
a new era of co-operation and trust. Expanded defence
co-operation was perceived as an integral aspect of the
expanding ties. The two leaders exchanged thoughts on
their shared global concerns and agreed that making the
world a safer place was an overriding priority. They
recognized the importance of working closely together in
the war against terrorism and in combating proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems.
They agreed that policies encouraging greater integration
of the two economies and with the global economy would
offer opportunities to expand and strengthen their
economic partnership. To this end, the two leaders also
expressed their desire to strengthen cooperation on
international economic issues including the WTO’s Doha
Development Agenda, and on the bilateral efforts such
as the U.S.-India Economic Dialogue and the High
Technology Cooperation Group. Foreign Secretary visited
Washington DC from 16-18 September 2004 to hold
discussions with his counterparts in the US
Administration. He had meetings in the State
Department, the White House and the Pentagon. Foreign
Office Consultations and the Asian Security Dialogue
were held between Foreign Secretary and Under Secretary
Marc Grossman. Foreign Secretary had very good meetings
with top officials in the US Administration, including
Secretary of State-designate Condoleeza Rice, Deputy
Secretary of Defence Paul Wolfowitz, Deputy Secretary
of State Richard Armitage and with Under Secretary for
Business, Economic & Agricultural Affairs Alan Larson.
Foreign Secretary also met with Under Secretary of
Defence Douglas Feith, Under Secretary of Commerce
Kenneth Juster and Deputy National Security Adviser,
Steve Hadley. These meetings provided occasion for a very

I

ndia-US relations continued to witness intensive
engagement towards a qualitative transformation in the
year 2004-05. Both Governments reiterated their resolve
to continue the process of developing a strategic
partnership between India and the US. There is strong
commitment on both sides to further widen, deepen and
strengthen these ties. This is reflected in the Common
Minimum Programme of the Indian Government and the
Address of President to the Parliament in June 2004. With
the re-election of President Bush in November 2004 the
US Government has expressed its commitment to make
the strategic partnership between India and US even more
solid.
The two countries are involved in a broad dialogue on
issues of mutual concern and interest, including strategic
issues, defence, combating international terrorism,
peacekeeping, science and technology, cyber security,
health, trade, space, energy and environment. There is
interaction between the two governments at all levels.
External Affairs Minister’s visit to Washington DC in June
2004 and subsequent meeting on the sidelines of ASEAN
Regional Forum on 7-8 July 2004 with then US Secretary
of State Colin Powell served to establish direct contact at
the political level. On the US side, then Deputy Secretary
of State Richard Armitage visited New Delhi on 13-14
July 2004 to reconfirm US commitment to continued
expansion of India-US ties. The Defence Policy Group
meeting in June 2004 in Delhi and India-US Space
Conference in Bangalore in June 2004 provided positive
signals.
Prime Minister’s US Visit
Prime Minister met President Bush on 21 September 2004
on the sidelines of UNGA in New York. In the Joint
Statement “US -India partnership: Co-operation & Trust”
they noted that “bilateral relations had never been as close
as they were at present” and set the direction for further
development of the India - U.S. strategic partnership.
During the meeting, President Bush emphasised that US
95

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

extensive exchange of views at high levels, on both
bilateral relations as also a number of regional and global
issues. The US reiterated its strong commitment to
strengthen Indo-US relations. Foreign Secretary led an
industry-government delegation for the third HTCG
meeting in Washington DC on 18-19 November 2004.

TOW-2A missiles and 14 TOW-2A Fly-to-Buy missiles
(valued at $ 1.2 billion). India’s strong concern with
respect to U.S. arms package to Pakistan was conveyed at
high levels to the US Government. The repercussions of
such sales on the ongoing India-Pakistan dialogue,
currently poised at a sensitive juncture, were brought out.
It was also pointed out that such transfers of arms to
Pakistan at a time when Indo-US relations were seeing
significant transformation and the US was being perceived
in India as strategic partner, would impact on the positive
sentiments and goodwill that have come to characterize
Indo-U.S. relations. U.S. officials stated that the United
States values its relationship with India and that President
Bush is personally committed to take it forward. As far as
India-Pakistan relations were concerned, while the US
has an arms supply relationship with Pakistan, it was
supportive of the India-Pakistan dialogue. It would also
continue to take up concerns relating to cross-border
terrorism.

During this meeting Data Privacy and Defence
Technology were the main themes for the industrygovernment day, while Strategic Trade and Trade
Facilitation were the areas of focus on the governmentgovernment session. The meetings saw strong
participation by both Indian industry and US as well as
by government representatives from both sides. The
plenary session had almost 100 participants.
India welcomed President Bush’s initiative of 11 February
2004 enunciating proposals to combat WMD
proliferation. As part of our bilateral dialogue mecahnisms,
AS (UN) and JS (AMS) held discussions with Assistant
Secretary Stephen Rademaker on Strategic Stability and
with Assistant Secretary Susan Burk on Non-proliferation
Issues in Washington D.C. on 22 November 2004.U.S.
Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld visited India on 8-9
December 2004 and called on the Prime Minister besides
having meetings with External Affairs Minister, Defence
Minister, and the National Security Adviser. There was
visible interest in broadening the ambit of bilateral defence
cooperation.

Established in January 2000, the Joint Working Group on
Counter Terrorism (JWGCT) continued to be a useful
mechanism to further understanding of each other’s
concerns. The sixth meeting of the JWGCT, held in New
Delhi from 31 August - 1 September 2004, discussed
current trends in international terrorism, the situation in
Afghanistan, and trends and concerns in South Asia,
including cross-border terrorism. The two sides also (i)
exchanged information on the law enforcement,
legislative, financial and other measures taken in the field
of counter-terrorism; (ii) agreed to continue training and
capacity building programme; (iii) exchanged perspectives
on multilateral efforts to counter-terrorism.

An elaborate institutional structure of dialogue on defence
issues is overseen by the Defence Policy Group, which
continued its discussions at the meeting on 1-2 June 2004.
Three aspects of our relationship - military exchanges,
defence supplies and technical cooperation - are each
addressed by a separate bilateral group. Military contacts,
exchanges and exercises have been regular and have
developed their own dynamics. Notable among them in
2004 have been Ex ‘Co-operative Cope Thunder’ in
Alaska from 15-31 July 2004 (between the Air Forces),
Ex Yudh Abhyas in Hawaii from 12-31 July 2004 and Ex
Balance Iroquois/ Ex Vajra Prahar in Leh from 5-15
September 2004 (between the Armies), and Malabar Ex
from 5-10 October 2004 and Ex Flash Iroquois in 6-24
October (between the Navies).

The first ever visit by a US Senate Majority Leader,
Senator Bill Frist, accompanied by Majority Whip Senator
Mitch McConnell, Senator Mike DeWine, and Senator
Norm Coleman took place on 10 January 2005. The
delegation called on the PM, External Affairs Minister,
Minister of Health and Family Welfare and the Foreign
Secretary. Another Congressional delegation led by
Chairman of the House Subcommittee on Asia and Pacific
Affairs, Representative James Leach and comprising
Senator Sam Brownback, Senator John Corzine,
Representative Frank Pallone, Representative Diane
Watson, Representative Earl Blumenauer, Representative
Scott Garrett, and Representative Wayne Gilchrest visited
New Delhi on 13 January 2005 and called on the Prime
Minister, External Affairs Minister and the Finance
Minister.

The US Department of Defence, on 16 November 2004,
notified the US Congress of proposed sale of military
equipment to Pakistan including eight P-3C Orion
maritime surveillance aircraft, six PHALANX Close-In
Weapon Systems and an ammunition complement of 2000
96

The Americas

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh calls on US President George W. Bush in New York on 21 September 2004.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh at the New York Stock Exchange on 22 September 2004.

97

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

US is India’s largest trade partner and India rank 18th in
the list of USA’s partners. The total trade in merchandise
and commodities was $15.91 billion (up 17 per cent from
$13.56 billion in the same period last year) in the first
nine months (January-September) of calendar year 2004.
The rate of growth of our exports to US in this period has
been impressive 26 per cent (from $9.95 billion to $ 11.54
billion).

the Government of the United States of America
regarding mutual assistance between their Customs
Administrations was signed in New Delhi on 15 December
2004. The Agreement is aimed at facilitating reliable,
quick and cost effective information and intelligence for
the prevention, apprehension and investigation of
Customs offences and offenders.
India and US have finalized a new Air Transport
Agreement (ATA) after the bilateral civil aviation talks
which were held from 13-15 January 2005 in Washington
DC. The new agreement was initialled by representatives
of the two countries and is expected to be signed at a
later date at ministerial level. The proposed ATA would
replace the existing 1956 Agreement to meet the growing
requirements for air services and rising demand for travel
facilities between the two countries. Following the
conclusion of ATA, the air services between the two
countries are expected to see an exponential growth,
giving a greater fillip and thrust to the existing passenger,
air cargo and mail services between the two countries.
The ATA would also facilitate the rapidly increasing trade
and commercial traffic, promote tourism and further
enhance travel amenities and choices for the movement
and travel of people of two countries.

The US is India’s major FDI source, accounting for 21
per cent of approved FDI ($16.48 billion) between January
1991 and March 2004. India’s service exports to the US
are more than $6 billion annually. To enhance the trade
and economic relationship between the two countries a
dialogue process consisting of a triad was followed – Next
Steps in Strategic Partnership (NSSP), High Technology
Cooperation Group (HTCG) and the high-level Economic
Dialogue.
Since the establishment of the HTCG, high-technology
trade between India and US, including licensed trade in
dual-use items, has grown substantially. The U.S. dual use
licenses for India climbed from 423 in FY 2002 to 619 in
FY 2003 and 912 in FY 2004. In value terms too, this
trade has gone up from $26.78 million in FY 2002 to
$90.06 million in 2004. The license approval rate has
increased from 84 percent to 90 percent in two-year time.

India-US Economic Dialogue was set up following an
understanding between US President and Prime Minister
of India in November 2001. In 2004 both Governments
agreed to the designation of Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission as the Co-Chairperson and Foreign Secretary
as his Deputy, and the Economic Policy Assistant to the
US President as the Co-Chair and Under Secretary for
Economic, Business and Agricultural Affairs as his Deputy
from the respective sides. The dialogue is being revamped
to lend it greater focus and efficacy.

The Next Steps in Strategic Partnership (NSSP) gave
political direction to enhance cooperation in four areas civilian space, civilian nuclear energy, ‘dual use’ items and
missile defence. These areas of cooperation are designed
to progress through a series of reciprocal steps that build
on each other. Since January 2004, the two governments
worked closely to conclude Phase One of the NSSP. This
included implementation of measures to address
proliferation concerns and ensure compliance with export
controls. These efforts enabled the US to make
modifications to export licensing policies that will foster
cooperation in commercial space programs and permit
certain exports to power plants at safeguarded nuclear
facilities. ISRO Headquarters was removed from the
Department of Commerce Entity List. The completion of
Phase One of NSSP was announced in a Joint Statement
on 17 September 2004 during Foreign Secretary’s visit to
US. Subsequently, two meetings - one in New Delhi on
21 October and the other in Washington on 18 November
- took place of the Implementation Group of NSSP to
explore ways to move further in the next phase.

The second meeting of the India-US Cyber Security
Forum (IUSCSF) was held in Washington on 8-10
November 2004. The Plenary and the Working Group
sessions resulted in a very substantive programme of
action.
Following the Tsunami tragedy, India and USA together
with Japan and Australia and later joined by the
Netherlands, and Canada formed a Core Group to
coordinate more effective joint action in the first phase
of operations. The group worked together closely with
the UN and examined ways in which the relief effort could
best be channelised through the UN. Even after
disbanding of the Core Group, the two countries

An Agreement between the Government of India and
98

The Americas

cooperated within the overall ambit of the UN. India had
deputed Liaison Officers at Hawaii with the Pacific
Command and at Utaphao at the Combined Support
Force (CSF) 536 and sent two US MPAT (Multinational
Planning and Augmentation Team) trained officer to
Utaphao to participate in the planning exercise at the
CSF 536.

their dialogues on international, regional and global
strategic issues. They agreed to work towards the
recommendations of the High-level UN Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change and reiterated their commitment
towards contributing to a more effective, representative
and accountable world body. India also welcomed the
Canadian Prime Minister’s initiative for a meeting of G20 leaders to discuss issues of global concern, such as
terrorism, development and global public health.

Catalogue of likely events till March 31 2005:
Visit of US Transportation Secretary Norman Y.
Mineta in February 2005 when the Air Transport
Agreement is likely to be signed.

Prime Minister of Canada conveyed his condolences over
the tsunami tragedy. The two Leaders underlined the need
for a strong and sustained international response to such
adversity, welcomed coordination of relief efforts resulting
from their participation in the Core Group and recognized
a multilateral initiative for regional warning and natural
disaster preparedness as a priority. Prime Minister accepted
an invitation extended by Prime Minister Martin to visit
Canada.

Visit of Treasury Secretary tentatively suggested for
March 2005.

Canada
The Prime Minister of Canada Mr. Paul Martin visited
India on 17-18 January 2005. He called on the President,
met with Prime Minister and received the External Affairs
Minister. In a Joint Statement, released after discussions
between the two Prime Ministers, the two leaders agreed
on the initiatives to strengthen and enhance the
architecture of the India-Canada partnership and
contribute to addressing global challenges more effectively.
It was agreed, in particular, to direct designated scientific
advisers on each side to report on advancing S&T
collaboration, encourage strategic collaboration in select
areas of science and industrial technologies, deepen
environmental cooperation including the promotion of
environmental friendly technologies, support a CEO
Roundtable that would make recommendations for
expanding economic ties, strengthen health research
cooperation, advance cultural ties and enhance people
to people contacts through improved visa and consular
services by the two governments. The Joint Statement
recognized the shared community and common history
between India and Canada as natural assets. Both leaders
also recognized a multilateral initiative for regional
warning and natural disaster preparedness as a priority.
The two Prime Ministers committed themselves to a
sustained political engagement, a structured exchange of
visits at the Cabinet level and to promote dialogues
between their officials.

Health Minister of Canada, Ujjal Dosanjh, visited India
just prior to the visit of Prime Minister Martin. During
this visit, the Indian Council of Medical Research and
Canadian Institute of Health Research signed an MoU
on cooperation in the health sector.
After he took over as Prime Minister in December 2003,
Prime Minister Paul Martin reiterated Canada’s
commitment to the expansion of political, economic and
commercial ties with India. Both India and Canada were
preoccupied with general elections in 2004 and Canada
continued its process of foreign policy review through the
year. General elections in Canada saw a record number of
Canadians of Indian origin elected to the House of
Commons. These included Ujjal Dosanjh, Gurbax Singh
Malhi, Ruby Dhalla, Navdeep Singh Bains (all from the
Liberal Party), and Gurmat Grewal and Nina Grewal,
Deepak Obhrai and Rahim Jaffer (from the Conservative
Party). Ujjal Dosanjh is part of 39-member Paul Martin
cabinet and holds the important Health portfolio. Several
Indian-Canadians were also elected to the Provincial
Parliaments.
Following general elections in Canada in June 2004, Prime
Minister Paul Martin sent former Canadian Cabinet
Minister Herb Dhaliwal as his Special Representative to
India carrying a letter of felicitation for Prime Minister.
The choice of Mr. Dhaliwal as the Canadian Prime
Minister’s emissary reflected the growing role of the
Indian-Canadian community in Canadian political life.

Apart from a review of bilateral relations, discussions also
focused on recent developments in the respective regions,
notably the transition to democracy in Afghanistan, India’s
dialogue with Pakistan, the situation in Iraq, developments
in South East Asia and the Americas. The two Prime
Ministers agreed that India and Canada should enhance

The 6th India-Canadian Joint Working Group (JWG) on
99

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Counter Terrorism met on 13 May 2004 in Ottawa. The
meeting discussed ways to further expand and streamline
cooperation in security and terrorism related matters. It
helped further understanding of each other’s concerns
and capabilities in this area. Discussions were wide
ranging. Both sides assessed the Group as very useful and
an area of cooperation that is becoming increasingly
relevant to international peace and security. There is now
commonality of approach between India and Canada that
terrorism does not have any national boundaries.
India and Canada continued to actively promote bilateral
trade and investment during the year. During the period
1 January 2004 to 31 August 2004, Indian exports to
Canada were C$ 1035 million and imports from Canada
were C$ 510 million. Indo-Canadian bilateral trade has
increased from US$ 848.73 million in 1997-98 to US$
1350.47 million in 2003-2004, registering 59.11 per cent
increase within a period of five years. Our exports have
increased by 77 per cent and the imports by about 40 per
cent during this period. The balance of trade has always
remained in favour of India for the last five years. Major
items of Indian exports to Canada are textiles & garments,
gems and jewellery, organic chemicals, iron & steel, coffee,
tea and other food products. Major items of India’s import
from Canada are wood pulp, newsprint, telecom and
power equipment, aviation-related equipment, fertilizers
and chemicals.
A number of Canadian companies have established a
strong presence in India, in the IT and financial services
sectors, with software development and electronic
component facilities. Similarly, there has been
considerable activity in the financial services sector with
the expansion of Scotia Bank and Dundee Bancorp
networks, the Birla Sun Life joint venture, TDWaterhouse and Tata Finance, and the Lombard-ICICI
partnerships.A new trend is that of Indian software
companies investing in Canada. These include Infosys,
Satyam, Wipro and Tata Consultancy all of whom have
offices in Canada. Birla has set up a pulp mill.
The two Governments are currently negotiating a Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement. A
Canadian delegation from their Department of
International Trade visited New Delhi in this connection
from 27-29 September 2004. A second round of talks was
held in New Delhi on 21-22 February 2005.
A 19-member business delegation from the Government
of Quebec visited New Delhi from 1-2 November 2004
and Mumbai from 4-5 November 2004. The objective of

the visit was to hold business negotiations with Indian
companies and also to prepare the groundwork for a visit
by the Premier of Quebec to India in early 2006. A twomember official delegation from the International Business
Development Division of the Provincial Government of
Manitoba visited India on 15-19 November 2004 to hold
discussions with Chambers of Commerce in India.
For the first time a Canadian received the ‘Padam Shri’
Award in 2004. The Award was given to Flora
MacDonald, former Member of Parliament, Federal
Minister and a prominent educationist and social worker.
Flora Macdonald visited India to receive the ‘ Padam Shri’
at an Investiture Ceremony at Rashtrapati Bhawan, New
Delhi on 30 June 2004.
The main community organization in Ottawa, the IndiaCanada Association (ICA) and Mr. Deepak Obhrai,
Member of Parliament, jointly organised the 6th annual
Diwali celebrations in the Parliament at Ottawa on 16
November 2004. Prime Minister Paul Martin attended
the event and spoke in recognition of the contribution
made by Indian-Canadians to the development of Canada
and towards making Canada a truly multicultural society.
In addition, leaders of several opposition parties in
Parliament and a large number of other MPs and Senators
also attended the Diwali function.
Foreign Office Consultations (FOCs) were held on 16-17
December 2004 at the level of Secretary (West) and the
Canadian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr. Peter
Harder, after a gap of three years. The last FOCs were
held in April 2001. It is expected that the year 2005 would
see further expansion and deepening engagement between
the two countries.

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
The level of engagement of the Government of India with
the Latin American region continued to strengthen and
deepen in 2004. The thrust of our policy towards the
region is to strengthen and widen the existing relationship,
setting up a mechanism for political dialogue and
cooperation, and enhancing trade and commerce.
Framework agreements are established with the regional
groupings such as with the MERCOSUR group of
countries, Political Dialogue and Cooperation mechanism
with the CAN (Andean Community), a standing Joint
Commission on consultation, cooperation and
coordination with CARICOM, mechanism of Political
Consultations with the Central American Group of
countries (SICA).

100

The Americas

Argentina
India’s cordial relationship was reflected in several official
visits and trade delegations. A 19-day cultural festival,
NAMASTE-CONOCIENDO LA INDIA, was organized
in September/October 2004 comprising of a photographic
exhibition, feature films, talk on ‘Indian Woman’, fashion
show, classical dance performance, musical recital, Indian
folklore/contemporary dances and a theatre presentation.
An Indian film festival in April 2004 was organised in the
prestigious San Martin Theatre.

Brazil
The momentum of the bilateral co-operation emanating
from the visit of President Lula’s to India in January 2004
continued in the year. Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of
Commerce & Industry visited Brazil in June 2004 and
met the Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Amorim,
Minister of Foreign Trade, Luiz Fernando Furlan, and
discussed bilateral co -operation. Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh met President Lula of Brazil, on the
margins of the UN General Assembly on 21 September
2004. Trade between India and Brazil is expected to
improve over that of the 2003. In October 2004 signing
of air services agreement between India and Brazil was
approved.

Chile
The President of Chile, Dr. Ricardo Lagos visited India
from 18 to 22 J anuary 2005 on an official visit. Chilean
President held discussions of mutual interest with
President, Prime Minister, and External Affairs Minister.
India and Chile agreed on the urgent need for reforms of
the UN and expansion of the Security Council to reflect
the new realities of the international situation. Three
agreements for cooperation were signed during the visit,
namely, Framework Agreement for Economic
Cooperation; MoU between the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research and the Chilean Agricultural
Research Institute and MoU on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary issues between the Ministries of Agriculture.

Colombia
Close relations were marked by bilateral exchange of visits.
Colombian Vice Minister for Bilateral Relations Mr
Camilo Reyes visited New Delhi in May 2004 for Foreign
Office Consultations. In September 2004, Shri Rao
Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for External Affairs,visited
Colombia and reviewed ways to enhance bilateral
relations. President Álvaro Uribe extended an invitation

to the President to visit Colombia, which has been
accepted in principle. Exports from India to Colombia
registered 41.8 per cent growth to reach US$102.6 million.
Indian Textile Exhibition was organised and Chemexcil
delegation visited Colombia. Indian Company secured
contracts for supply of plant and technology for
manufacture of fuel ethanol worth about US$ 32 mn.

Cuba
Indo Cuba Relations continued to be warm and friendly.
Visits of Scientific delegations from India such as nonconventional energy, biomass, wind energy generation,
co-generation from sugar, small hydropower generation
and solar energy gave further thrust to bilateral relations.
A Protocol in the field of Renewal Energy for the Biennium
2004-05 was concluded. ONGC Videsh Ltd (OVL) visited
Cuba in March 2004 to study the geological and seismic
data pertaining to the blocks in the Cuban EEZ sector of
the Gulf of Mexico being offered for exploration to
interested parties. The proposal is under consideration of
OVL.
Cuban Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs Mr. Manuel
Aguilera visited Delhi in March 2004 as special envoy of
the Cuban Foreign Minister to discuss issues related to
the Human Rights Commission meeting in Geneva. In
2004-05 all the 30 ITEC slots have been utilized. The
Army Sports Institute has recruited three Cuban coaches
for training boxers, weightlifters and divers in addition to
coach hired by the Boxing Federation of India. The Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr. Jose Guerra Menchero
visited Delhi in December 2004 and called on External
Affairs Minister.

Dominican Republic
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for External
Affairs, visited Dominican Republic in September 2004
and called on President Fernandez and Vice President
Rafael Albuquerque and Foreign Minister Carlos Troncoso
Morales. The DR government announced its intention
to upgrade diplomatic relations and open an Embassy in
New Delhi. It also invited Indian companies to develop
business and invest in areas such as IT, Pharmaceuticals,
infrastructure projects and offered to work with India in
the multilateral forums.

Ecuador
Ecuador agreed to re-open its Embassy in New Delhi and
has shown keenness for Indian expertise in the petroleum

101

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

industry and pharmaceutical products from India. Indian
Textile Exhibition was organised in Guayaquil. 3
Ecuadorian nationals received ITEC training in India up
to December 2004. India participated in the celebrations
connected with the declaration of Quito as the
Iberoamerican culture capital for the year 2004 with a
Bharatnatyam ballet group led by Ananda Shankar Jayant,
which held performances to captivated audiences in Quito
in October 2004.

Mexico
Relations continud to develop and strengthend
further.Mexican Foreign Minister Dr. Luis Ernesto Derbez,
had a brief meeting with External Affairs Minister in
Washington in June 2004 and discussed issues of common
interest. He led a delegation to India in August 2004 and
called on External Affairs Minister, Finance Minister,
Minister of Commerce & Industry among others to discuss
and explore ways to strengthen bilateral economic and
trade ties. Ms. Maria del Rocio Ruiz Chavez, Vice Minister,
Ministry of Economy visited New Delhi, Bangalore and
Hyderabad in August 2004 to explore avenues for further
cooperation in S&T and information technology sectors.
Delegation from the Election Commission of India visited
Mexico in October 2004 and signed a MoU for
cooperation. Indo-Mexican Friendship Group in the
Mexican Chamber of Deputies (Lower House) held its
inaugural meeting in November 2004 in the premises of
the Mexican Congress to further strengthen bilateral
relations. Cultural and educational relations continued
to strengthen.
Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Rao Inderjit
Singh led an Indian delegation to Mexico in February
2005. He met the Foreign Minister of Mexico and
discussed issues of mutual interest.
Bilateral trade maintained a very encouraging growth
pattern during 2004. Indian exports to Mexico have
already reached US$ 609.4 million during JanuarySeptember 2004 as compared to US$ 397.75 million for
the corresponding period in 2003, having registered a
significant increase of 53.2 per cent. Similarly, Mexican
exports to India have also grown from US$ 324.3 million
to US$ 365.7 million during the same period. Thus, total
bilateral trade is expected to cross more than US$ one
billion mark in 2004 around US$ 1.2 billion, the highest
ever figure achieved by India in bilateral trade with any
country in the region. Several trade promotion measures
were taken such as participation in the international trade

fairs, generating awareness about our capabilities and
technology and arranging visits from Mexico.

Uruguay
Uruguayan vice Foreign Minister visited India in
September 2004, and participated in the foreign office
consultation. He met representatives of Reliance,
Mahindra and Mahindra, Central Warehousing
Corporation of India (CWC), Nasscom BioTech and I
Flex.

Venezuela
Foreign Office consultations were held in New Delhi in
May 2004. The Venezuelan Foreign Minister, Mr. Jesus
Arnaldo Perez, paid an official visit to India in September
2004 and had discussions with External Affairs Minister,
Minister for Petroleum & Natural Gas, Minister for
Environment and Forests, Minister of State for Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation. Mr. Rafael Dario
Ramirez, the Venezuelan Minister of Energy & Mines met
his counterpart in September 2004 and cooperation in
hydrocarbon sector. Space Research and collaboration,
IT were other areas of cooperation.

CENTRAL AMERICA – SICA
India’s traditionally cordial relations with the seven
countries that comprise Central America, viz. Costa Rica,
Belize, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and
Panama entered a new phase during 2004. The signing of
a Declaration for the Establishment of a Mechanism for
Political Co-operation and Dialogue between India and
the member States of System of Central American
Integration - (SICA) in 2004 during the visit of the SICA
Foreign Ministers to India is an important milestone. Shri
Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for External Affairs
had substantive meeting with Dr. Oscar Santamaria,
Secretary General of SICA and his team in September
2004 reiterating India’s interest to develop multi-faceted
cooperation with SICA member countries. Secretary
General SICA who had visited India earlier in the year
pledged cooperation with India in various areas including
IT, education, disaster management, infrastructure
projects, environment issues, tourism, etc. and proposed
regular contacts between India and SICA. It will impart a
new momentum in India’s relations with the region, both
bilaterally and regionally.
Three new governments who assumed office during this
period in Guatemala, El Salvador and Panama conveyed

102

The Americas

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh meets Mr. Paul Martin, Prime Minister of Canada during his visit to India, 17-18 January 2005.

External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh called on the President of Chile Dr. Ricardo Lagos during his visit to India,
18-22 January 2005.

103

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

their interest in developing and strengthening relations
with India particularly in the context of learning from
the Indian experience in human resource development.
Economic and commercial relations remained on the
upswing with the region registering a total of US$ 164.89
million in 2003-2004, an increase of 12 per cent over 200203 when bilateral trade stood at US$ 149 million. Indian
business and industry is moving to new areas such as
engineering goods, automobile part, chemicals, drugs and
pharmaceuticals and information technology. Growing
visa applications reflected this trend. Co-operation in
training under ITEC grew further.

dialogue with CARICOM leading to CARICOM-India
Joint Commission on Consultation, Cooperation and
Coordination to institutionalize and enhance CARICOMIndia relations. One of its first tasks is to formulate a
CARICOM-India Technical Cooperation Programme in
a range of areas including information technology. The
Minister of State for External Affairs Rao Inderjit Singh
led India-Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Political
Dialogue and addressed the CARICOM Conference in
Suriname in February 2005. The bilateral cooperation
between India and CARICOM was reviewed and
strengthened the political understanding.

Panama

Guyana

Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for External
Affairs attended the inauguration of the new President
Martin Torrijos forming the Government in September
2004 and conveyed a message of friendship and
felicitations from President. He met first Vice President
and Foreign Minister Samuel Lewis Navarro and Vice
Minister Ricardo Duran and agreed to work towards
enhanced economic and commercial cooperation and to
ease visa process. India’s exports to Panama grew from $
49.4 million to $ 54.44 million in 2003-2004. There is
growing interest in IT sector. Cultural and academics
cooperation was enhanced.

Foreign Minister Rudy Insanally of Guyana while
addressing the 59th UNGA session, on 29 September
2004, reiterated Guyana’s support to India’s Permanent
Membership of expanded UNSC. India is committed for
construction of a cricket stadium in Georgetown and in
November two financial Agreements were signed in this
regard in the presence of the President of Guyana Mr.
Bharrat Jagdeo. The first was a GOI grant of US$ 6 million
whereas the other was an EXIM Bank concessional Line
of Credit for US $ 19 million.

El Salvador
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for External
Affairs visited El Salvador in September 2004 at the
invitation of the Foreign Minister of El Salvador. He met
Ana Vilma de Escobar, Vice President and Francisco
Esteban Lainez, Foreign Minister of El Salvador and
discussed issues of mutual interest including ways to
enhance cooperation in IT, pharmaceuticals, agriculture
and engineering. The Salvadorian side invited investment
from Indian companies. Bilateral trade with El Salvador,
though modest, grew from US$ 4.9 million in 2002-03 to
US$ 7.64 million in 2003-04.

Guatemala
Trade with Guatemala grew over 20 per cent from US$
20.54 million in 2002-03 to US$ 26.56 million in 200304, with a substantial component being automobiles and
auto components and pharmaceuticals. Guatemala-India
Chamber of Commerce was established.

Caricom
India proposed an institutional linkage for regular political

During the year 25 nominees were trained in India from
Guyana under the ITEC programme. Presently in Guyana
there are 7 Indian ITEC experts working in different fields.
New Guyana Pharmaceutical Corporation (NGPC) and
India’s Cipla agreed to cooperate that will allow NGPC
access to a full range of raw materials, bulk formulations,
finished products and technical know-how from Cipla
covering anti-retrovirals, which NGPC has started to
produce for the state-funded HIV/AIDS treatment
programme. India gifted solar photovoltaic pumps, G$ 16
million agro-processing Vehicle to the Guyana.

Haiti
India gifted US$10000 to procure medicines for the
victims of Hurricane Jean which devastated Haiti in
September 2004. Business delegation visited India and
explored ways to enhance trade and commerce.

Honduras
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of state for External
Affairs led a delegation to Honduras in February 2005.He
met the President of Honduras as well as Foreign Ministers
of Central America (SICA) and discussed issues of mutual
concern including cooperation between India and SICA.

104

The Americas

Jamaica
India and Jamaica relations remained close and friendly.
India extended support and relief measures worth US$
200,000 to Jamaica in the wake of devastation caused by
hurricane. India extended a credit line of US$10 million
for supplies from India of centrifugal pumps for water
supply and irrigation projects, another credit line of US$2
million was extended for machinery and equipment for
the small-scale industry and technical assistance in the
field of Dairy and Engineering Foundry. Jamaica as an
important member of the Caribbean Community and
Common Market (CARICOM) played an important role
in establishing an India-CARICOM dialogue mechanism.

in February 2005. A concessional credit of US$16 million
was extended to Suriname for the construction of a 161
KV electric transmission line being executed by Indian
companies, M/s. PEC and L&T. Mrs. Maria E. Levens,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Suriname visited India in
November for India-Suriname Joint Commission. India
agreed to provide a new Line of Credit for supply of
equipment and services from India in areas such as
agriculture, forestry, energy, defence and IT training.
Mr. Rattan Kumar Ajodhia, Vice-President of Suriname
visited India from 5 to 11 January 2005 as Chief Guest of
the Pravasi Bhartiya Diwas, 2005 at Mumbai.

The Bahamas (concurrent accreditation)

Trinidad & Tobago

Concurrent accreditation for The Bahamas was shifted
from Indian Mission in Washington DC to the Mission in
Kingston in July 2004. The Bahamas continued to support
India’s concerns in the international forums. India
extended relief supply to Bahamas in the wake of
devastation caused by hurricane

Bilateral relations between India and T&T remained
friendly and cordial during the year. Special emphasis was
placed on furthering the economic and commercial
linkages. A credit line was launched in June 2004 for US$8
million to finance Indian exports of goods and services.
Bilateral trade continued to grow steadily at over 30 per
cent per annum. T&T is a major Diaspora country and
remained active. Seminar, International Hindi Conference
and Hindi classes were organised to support Diaspora
needs. Prof. George Maxwell Richards, President of T&T
paid a private visit to India in November 2004 and called
on the President.

Suriname
Relations between India and Suriname continued to be
strengthened. Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State
for External Affairs led an Indian delegation to Suriname

105

9

United Nations and
International Organisations

C

haracterized as a ‘year of opportunities and difficulties
for the United Nations’ by the Secretary-General, the year
saw the U.N. being called upon to perform difficult tasks,
but with limitations in terms of support and resources.
While the role and relevance of the UN came under
continuing scrutiny, the year ended with the submission
of a report proposing a broad framework for Collective
Security for the new century, by the Secretary-General’s
High Level Panel. The UN continued its involvement in
challenging peacekeeping and peace-building missions in
different parts of the world, including Afghanistan, Cote
d’Ivoire, Haiti, Kosovo, Liberia, Sudan, Timor-Leste, and
the Democratic Republic of Congo among others.
The UN also continued its activities in areas of human
rights, health, women and children, population,
sustainable development, financing for development,
humanitarian activities and other development-related
questions. India continued to play an important role in
discussions at the UN and was often instrumental in
evolving consensus on important contentious questions,
while promoting the interests of the developing countries.
India was elected to the Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC) for the period 2005-07 with the highest
number of votes from the Asian Group.

The 59th session of the General Assembly
The 59th session was held before the publication in early
December 2004 of the report of the High-level Panel on
threats, challenges and change set up by the SecretaryGeneral. The Secretary-General devoted almost his entire
statement made at the beginning of the General Debate
to a plea for strengthening ‘rule of law’ at both national
and international levels. The 59 th session attached
continued importance to combating terrorism; held a
commemorative event on the ten-year review of the 1994
International Conference on Population and
Development held in Cairo; and adopted decisions based
on the report of the Secretary-General on the modalities,
format and organisation of the High-level plenary meeting
in 2005 for the comprehensive review of the
implementation of the Millennium Declaration and steps
for the realization of Millennium Development Goals.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the 59th session and in his address to the
General Assembly, reaffirmed India’s commitment to
multilateralism. Prime Minister emphasized the need to
reform the United Nations system, including through
expansion of the Security Council, in both permanent
and non-permanent categories, to make it a truly
representative body. The Prime Minister also underlined
India’s willingness to take on the obligations and
responsibilities that befit our standing and role in the world
community. He highlighted the dangers posed by terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
Prime Minister had bilateral meetings with the Heads of
State/Government of Afghanistan, Pakistan, South Africa
and the United States. He participated in a meeting with
the Heads of State/Government of Brazil, Japan and
Germany on United Nations reforms. The Prime Minister
also had a meeting with the United Nations Secretary
General Kofi Annan at which issues before the UN agenda
came up in discussions.
Minister of External Affairs Shri Natwar Singh
accompanied the Prime Minister for the 59 th United
Nations General Assembly session. External Affairs
Minister had meetings with a number of his counterparts,
including the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Angola, South Africa, Brazil, Thailand, China
and Bangladesh. He also met the Secretary General of
the Arab League and the Special Adviser to the UN
Secretary General. Minister of External Affairs had
separate meetings with the Ministers of the Group of Four
(consisting of India, Brazil, Germany and Japan), IndiaGulf Cooperation Council and IBSA (India, Brazil and
South Africa). He also met with members of the UN
Secretary General’s High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change.
Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri E. Ahamed
made a statement in the General Assembly on the items,
“Report of the Security Council and Question of equitable
representation on and increase in membership of the
Security Council and related matters”, and “Integrated
and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the

106

United Nations and International Organisations

outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields:
commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the
International Conference on Population and
Development”. Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri
Rao Inderjit Singh spoke at the General Assembly on the
item “Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency”.
India participated in the two special events held on the
eve of the beginning of the General Debate of the 59th
session. The first was the formal launch on 20 September
of the report of the World Commission on the social
dimensions of globalisation co-chaired by the presidents
of Tanzania and Finland. The text of the message from
the Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh was read out
on the occasion. The other event was a meeting convened
also on 20 September on the alleviation of hunger and
poverty, at the initiative of the President of Brazil, at which
the presidents of Brazil, Chile, France and Spain
participated.

India’s candidature as a permanent
member of UNSC
The year saw a steady accretion of support for India’s
candidature for permanent membership of the UN
Security Council, from various countries. India reached
agreements of mutual support with the other three main
aspirants, namely, Brazil, Germany and Japan. These were
announced during their visits to India in 2004, by
President of Brazil in January, German Foreign Minister
in July and Japanese Foreign Minister in August,
respectively. It is noteworthy that these aspirants are now
going to work together. This was reiterated at the highest
levels during the Summit held on 21 September 2004 in
New York, on the sidelines of the 59 th UN General
Assembly, of the leaders of Brazil, Germany, India and
Japan. The Group highlighted the need to reform the
Security Council to make it more representative,
legitimate and effective. They stressed that it was essential
that the Security Council include, on permanent basis,
countries that have the will and the capacity to take on
major responsibilities with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security. They also agreed that
Africa must be represented in the permanent membership
in the Security Council.
A large number of leaders in their speeches, during the
General Debate at the 59th session of the UN General
Assembly, referred to the necessity of UN institutional
reforms, the expansion of the Security Council, the

inclusion of new permanent members and India’s
credentials in this regard.
Discussions on these issues are likely to intensify in the
UN in the coming months. India will actively participate
in these discussions and see how best the objective of UN
reforms and of India’s candidature for permanent
membership of the UN Security Council can be advanced.

Political issues at the General Assembly
and Security Council
The Security Council
In the year 2004-05, India made a number of statements
in public meetings of the Security Council on issues of
importance such as Afghanistan, the Middle East, TimorLeste, terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-state actors, as well as thematic
issues such as UN peacekeeping operations, justice and
the rule of law and women and peace and security.
The General Assembly
India made statements on all issues of political and
strategic importance at the plenary session of the 59th
United Nation General Assembly, including Work of the
Organization; Report of the Security Council; Question
of equitable representation on and increase in membership
of the Security Council and related matters; Report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency; the Question
of Palestine; the Situation in the Middle East; the situation
in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security and Emergency international assistance for
peace, normalcy and reconstruction of war-stricken
Afghanistan.
Terrorism
The Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) followed an active programme of
implementation involving appropriate legislative
framework and measures to check financial flows to
terrorists. India has to-date submitted four reports
detailing legislative and other counter-measures in place
against terrorism. India also made statements on three
separate occasions in the Security Council in 2004-05 on
the item “Threats to International Peace and Security
Caused by Terrorist Acts”.
With the adoption of resolution 1535 of 26 March 2004
the Security Council established the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to enhance

107

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

the CTC’s ability to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 and effectively continue the capacitybuilding work in which it was engaged. It also reflected
the intention of the CTC to assume a more proactive role
in its dialogue with Member States, evaluate the
implementation of Resolution 1373, facilitate technical
assistance to Member States and promote closer
cooperation and coordination with International,
Regional and Sub-regional organisations.
The adoption of resolution 1566 (8 October 2004) by the
Security Council which, inter alia, condemned in the
strongest terms all acts of terrorism irrespective of their
motivation and called upon Member States to cooperate
fully to expeditiously adopt the draft Comprehensive
Convention on International Terrorism (CCIT) and the
draft international convention for the suppression of acts
of nuclear terrorism, was welcomed by India as a logical
extension of the existing multilateral cooperation on
counter-terrorism and the ideas first enunciated in
Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373.
Peacekeeping
India is presently one of the leading troop contributors to
UN Peacekeeping. India presently contributes troops to
eight of the sixteen ongoing UN Peace-keeping
operations.It is involved in the UN Mission in the
Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC), the UN
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the UN Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) and has a major civilian
police component in the UN Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). It has also provided military personnel to the
UN Missions in Burundi and Cote d’Ivoire, as also police
officers to UN Missions in Sierra Leone and Cyprus. India
will also be contributing an infantry battalion, together
with specialized and enabling resources, including an Air
Force and Police component, to the upcoming UN Mission
in Sudan (UNMISUD).
Presently, two senior positions in the field and at UN
Headquarters are held by Indians. Gen Randhir Kumar
Mehta was appointed to the prestigious post of the Military
Adviser to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
of the UN Secretariat on 29 January 2005.
The Centre for UN Peacekeeping (CUNPK), which was
established in September 2000 as a joint effort of the
Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Defence, with
the objective of meeting UN training requirements and
research, held various peacekeeping related events in the
course of the year. The ‘Asia Pacific Peace Operations -

Lessons Learned Seminar’ was co-hosted by CUNPK with
the United States Centre of Excellence for Disaster
Management and Humanitarian Assistance, from 19-23
April 2004. The Seminar was attended by 35 foreign
participants from 15 countries and 35 participants from
India. CUNPK also conducted two international training
capsules with the aim of providing integrated training in
UN peacekeeping to Military contingent Junior Officers
and Military Observers. A total of 26 foreign officers and
57 Indian officers attended these capsules. The
participation of some nominees from developing countries
was funded by Government of India. A National Seminar
was held on 11-12 October 2004 to explore the topic
‘Future of Peace Operations – Implications for India’, in
which 68 military and civilian personnel participated. 15
foreign and 20 Indian officers will be taking part in the
UN Logistics & Staff Officers capsule scheduled to be
conducted in January 2005.
India has a bilateral dialogue on peacekeeping with U.S.
and UK. The fourth meeting of the Indo-UK Joint
Working Group on Peacekeeping was held in CUNPK,
New Delhi from 23-25 November 2004. The meeting saw
a comprehensive exchange of views on the emerging
challenges in peacekeeping and an understanding of
mutual perspectives on various conceptual and
operational dimensions of peacekeeping. Apart from an
exchange of experiences and ideas, the JWG is also a forum
for planning joint activities and identifying institutional
cooperation in peacekeeping. In this framework, a threeweek ‘Train the Trainer’ programme was conducted in
New Delhi by Centrex, the U.K. national police training
institute, for Indian police officers involved in training
for UN peacekeeping. Further initiatives in bilateral
cooperation including a mutual exchange of instructors
for peacekeeping training Centres have been identified.
Non-Aligned Movement
India participated at the XIV Ministerial Conference of
the Non-Aligned Movement which was held in Durban,
South Africa from 17-19 August 2004. Minister of State
for External Affairs Shri Rao Inderjit Singh led the Indian
delegation. The Conference adopted the Durban
Declaration reiterating NAM’s commitment to
strengthening multilateralism and the centrality of the
United Nations. The theme of the Conference
“Challenges to Multilateralism in the 21st century” was
discussed in the interactive Ministerial session. In his
statement, Shri Rao Inderjit Singh brought out the integral
link between non-alignment and multilateralism. He also

108

United Nations and International Organisations

From left to right: Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi,Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula
da Silva and German Vice-Chancellor Joschka Fisher during the G-4 Meeting in New York on 21 September 2004.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh addressing the 59th session of UN General Assembly in New York on 23 September 2004.

109

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

stressed the need for UN reforms, of ensuring balance
between the developmental and promotional aspects of
UN, as distinct from regulatory aspects. He emphasized
the need for pooling together the capabilities in major
developing countries and made some concrete suggestions
in this regard.
India participated at the Ministerial Meeting of the NAM
Committee on Palestine held at Putrajaya, Malaysia on
13 May 2004 which decided to establish a Ministerial
delegation to be led by the Malaysian chair, to interact
with the Quartet (UN, EU, US and Russia) and the P-5,
to facilitate forward movement in the Middle East peace
process. Reiterating its solidarity with the Palestinian
cause and expressing concern at the grave political and
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories and the
unravelling of the peace process, the meeting also urged
the U.N. Security Council to authorize an international
presence and establish a UN Peacekeeping Mission in the
occupied territories; convene a special meeting on
Palestine on the sidelines of the next UNGA and further
mobilize international public opinion and civil society.
India also supported adoption, by the General Assembly,
of the NAM resolution entitled “Reaffirming the central
role of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security and promotion of
international cooperation”, on 5 August 2004.
The Annual Meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs
of the Non-Aligned Movement was held on the margins
of the 59th session of the UN General Assembly on 29
September 2004. India participated in the interactive
debate held during the meeting on the topic “Reforming
the United Nations to meet Global Threats and
Challenges in the 21st Century”. Based on the views
expressed by the delegates, the inputs of NAM on the
issue of UN reform were forwarded to the UN Secretary
General’s High Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change.
Middle East
The situation in the Middle East was a matter of continued
debate in the UN this year.The Tenth Emergency Special
Session of the General Assembly on the Situation in the
Occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory was reconvened on 16-20 July 2004
to consider the item on the “Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory”. India made a statement at the meeting and
voted in favour of the resolution which, inter alia,

acknowledged the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. The resolution was adopted by a vote of
150 votes in favour, 6 against and 10 abstentions.
Consideration of Agenda Items on the situation in the
Middle East and the Question of Palestine was taken up
at the General Assembly on 29-30 November 2004.
Several countries, including India, participated in the
debate on these items. While expressing regret and
condolences over the death of President Arafat, most
speakers called upon the parties concerned to put an end
to violence and resume political dialogue through
implementation of the “Quartet” Roadmap. Many
delegations were of the view that elections scheduled in
the Palestinian Authority and Israel’s disengagement plan
offered new opportunities to fulfil the vision of two States
living side by side within secure and recognised borders.
India voted in favour of the traditional resolutions under
the above agenda items. India also participated in an open
debate of the Security Council on the item ‘The situation
in the Middle East’.
Iraq
Following the request of the Iraqi Governing Council and
the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) for UN
facilitation in the transitional political process, the UN
Secretary General’s Special Advisor Lakhdar Brahimi
visited Iraq in February and April 2004 and outlined a
detailed roadmap for political transition. UN Security
Council resolution 1546 adopted unanimously on 8 June
2004 endorsed the Brahimi timetable for Iraqi political
transition and stated that the U.N. should play a leading
role in the process, as requested by the Iraqi Government.
As the first step in the above plan, an Iraqi Interim
Government (IIG) took over sovereignty on 30 June 2004
with the simultaneous dissolution of the Iraqi Governing
Council. The U.N. Security Council and the UN Secretary
General welcomed the handover of full responsibility and
authority for governing Iraq to the IIG and the end of the
occupation. On 14 July 2004, Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi,
who was serving as Pakistan’s ambassador to the U.S was
nominated as the Secretary General’s Special
Representative for Iraq. The second step of the Brahimi
Plan was completed in mid-August 2004 when the U.N.
facilitated the convening of a representative National
Conference of over a thousand delegates, which in turn
selected the members of the Interim National Council,
set up to advise the Interim Government on policy
matters. The UN also assisted in a limited manner in
organizing the direct national elections held on 31 January

110

United Nations and International Organisations

2005 to elect a Transitional Government. The UN assisted
in establishing an independent Electoral Commission and
in the technical preparation involving drafting of a
legislative framework, preparation of voters’ lists and
training of electoral workers. The elections are to be
followed by the drafting of a new constitution and
convening of a referendum to approve it, followed by the
setting up of a constitutionally elected permanent Iraqi
Government by 31 December 2005.
Apart from outlining the timetable for Iraqi political
transition, UN Security Council resolution 1546 also
determined the thorny issue regarding status of the
multinational force and its relationship with the Iraqi
Government, by mandating the setting up of the MNF
on the basis of the request of the IIG; by endorsing a
‘security partnership’ between the MNF and the IIG and
by making the continuation of the MNF in Iraq beyond
the stipulated one year, contingent upon the wishes of
the IIG. UNSCR 1546 also included provisions for full
transfer of economic powers including the disbursal of the
Development Fund of Iraq and the Oil-for-food
Programme.
Thus, from being a marginal player in the immediate
aftermath of the war, the UN moved on to play a bigger
role in the Iraqi political transition process. While the
U.N. is being called upon to play a larger role and has the
necessary mandate for it under UNSCR 1546, in reality,
it is hamstrung by the difficult security situation and has
had only a limited impact on the ground. Although the
UN has been re-engaged in Iraq, whether it would be
able to play a more substantive role and lead the
forthcoming critical steps in the transition process remain
to be seen.
India welcomed the unanimous adoption of UNSCR 1546,
viewing the endorsement of the Interim Government of
Iraq as the first step towards the transparent transfer of
full sovereignty to the people of Iraq. Noting that the role
of the UN had been unanimously accepted, it expected
that the UN would play a central role in the developing
situation in Iraq. Since the priority, in India’s view, was to
ensure an early return to conditions of security and
normalcy for all the people of Iraq, and keeping in mind
its historic and long-standing relationship with the Iraqi
people, India reiterated its commitment to assist Iraq in
the arduous task of political and economic reconstruction.
India announced a contribution of $ 30 million towards
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction needs of Iraq
through the ‘International Reconstruction Fund Facility for
Iraq (IRFF) set up by the UN. In June 2004, India

conveyed its interest in having the contribution earmarked
for electoral assistance in Iraq. Subsequently, pursuant to
the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between
the Election Commission of India and the United Nations
for Cooperation in Electoral Assistance on 29 August
2004, India has offered assistance to Iraq, through the
United Nations, in training of election officials and other
election-related areas, as also financial assistance of $ 5
million through the IRFF. Of this, an amount of $ 2.5
million has been earmarked for the UN Iraq Trust Fund
for Iraqi elections.
Afghanistan
In the UN, India continued to be supportive of a strong,
united, sovereign and independent Afghanistan. On 8
December 2004 the UN General Assembly took up two
items for discussion: ‘The situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security’ and
‘Emergency international assistance for peace, normalcy
and reconstruction of war-stricken Afghanistan’. A
number of countries, including India, made statements
under these agenda items. While India commended the
Afghan people for the successful electoral process and
the election of President Karzai as the first democratically
elected President of Afghanistan, it also cautioned about
the fragile security situation in the country, especially
continuing terrorist activity; drug production and
challenges to the consolidation of the central government.
All speakers, without exception, noted the remarkable
progress made by Afghanistan in its transition process, in
particular the successful adoption of a Constitution and
holding of presidential elections. Many delegations,
however, referred to the continuing challenges faced by
Afghanistan including, inter alia, terrorist threats, presence
of militias, drug production and trafficking and criminal
activity. Several delegations also referred to the need to
conduct timely and credible parliamentary and local
elections. Demonstrative of continued international
interest in Afghanistan, as many as 145 Member States,
including India, co-sponsored the General Assembly
resolution on Afghanistan, which was adopted by
consensus.
Information
The Committee on Information (COI) which makes
recommendations to the General Assembly on the policy
and activities of the Department of Public Information
(DPI) held its annual session in New York in April–May
2004. The main issue of interest continued to be the
controversy over the United Nations Information Centres

111

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

(UNICs). It was agreed that any decision on
regionalisation of UNICs would be deferred until a
detailed status report was made available to the
Committee on the functioning of the Regional
Information Centre that has been functional in Brussels
since February 2004. Upon conclusion of its proceedings,
the Committee adopted two resolutions on “Information
in the service of humanity” and “United Nations Public
Information Activities and Policies”. The Committee also
took a decision to expand its membership from 102 to
107 to include Qatar, Iceland, Luxembourg, Madagascar
and Cape Verde. The two resolutions and the decision
were subsequently endorsed by the Fourth Committee
when it discussed the agenda item: “Questions Relating
to Information” on 21 October 2004. These were
thereafter adopted by the plenary of the General Assembly
on 10 December 2004.
The Economic and Social Council
The substantive session of ECOSOC was held in New
York from 28 June -23 July 2004. The theme for the highlevel segment this year was “Resources Mobilisation and
Enabling Environment for Poverty Eradication in the
context of the implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2001-2010”. A Ministerial Declaration was adopted at
the conclusion of the high-level segment, which
recognised the weak implementation of the Programme
of Implementation for the LDCs, reaffirmed that good
governance both at national and international levels was
essential for the implementation of the commitments
embodied in the Programme of Action and emphasised
the need for concrete and substantial international support
from governments and international organisations to the
efforts by LDCs themselves.
The ECOSOC decided to endorse a strategy for smooth
transition of countries graduating from Least Developed
Country status and the recommendation of the
Committee on Development Policy to graduate Cape
Verde and Maldives from the group of Least Developed
Countries and requested the General Assembly to take
note of the recommendation.
The ECOSOC reviewed the work of the ad hoc advisory
groups of the ECOSOC on African countries emerging
from conflict and decided to extend the mandate of the
ad hoc advisory groups on Guinea-Bissau and Burundi
till the substantive session in 2005. The ECOSOC also
decided to reactivate the ad hoc advisory group on Haiti
and mandated the group to provide advice on Haiti’s long-

term development strategy to promote socio-economic
recovery and stability for consideration of the ECOSOC
at its substantive session in 2005.
The ECOSOC decided to upgrade the Ad hoc Group of
Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters to
a Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in
Tax Matters and to expand its mandate to consider, inter
alia, how new and emerging issues could affect
international cooperation in tax matters and develop
assessments and appropriate recommendations.
59th General Assembly
India continued to play an active role in the Second
Committee. The General Assembly decided to convene
a high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly at the
commencement of the 60th session in 2005, to undertake
a comprehensive review of the progress made in the
fulfilment of all the commitments contained in the
Millennium Declaration, including the internationally
agreed development goals and the global partnership
required for their achievement, and of the progress made
in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the
outcomes of the major UN conferences and summits in
the economic, social and related fields. In the light of this
decision, deliberations on economic, environment and
development issues in the Second Committee focused on
the implementation of the outcomes of the major UN
conferences and summits and the need for increased
resource flows for development. Delegations also
emphasised the need to discuss new and innovative
sources of financing for development, to complement the
increased aid flows. The General Assembly decided to
consider the proposals within the overall framework for
the follow-up of the International Conference on
Financing for Development.
The report of the World Commission on the Social
Dimension of Globalisation entitled “A fair globalisation:
Creating opportunities for all” received broad support of
delegations. A special meeting was organised by co-chairs
of the World Commission, Finnish President Tarja
Halonen and Tanzanian President Benjamin William
Mkapa, on 20 September 2004 at the United Nations to
launch the report. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
in his message on this occasion highlighted that effective
national action required an enabling and facilitatory
international environment, in which countries may
formulate policies designed to promote economic growth
and social justice, and expressed the hope that the report
would lead to the development of a broader international

112

United Nations and International Organisations

consensus on this subject. The General Assembly, for the
first time, underlined the importance of policy space in
the context of globalisation and interdependence.
Environment and Sustainable Development
Issues
India participated actively in the work of the twelfth
session of the Commission on Sustainable Development,
the high-level commission within the UN system for
sustainable development with the role of reviewing and
promoting the implementation of Agenda 21 and the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. The twelfth session
of Commission on Sustainable Development was held in
New York from 14-30 April 2004, which focused on the
constraints, obstacles and challenges faced by developing
countries in meeting the agreed Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation goals and targets in the thematic cluster
of Water, Sanitation and Human Settlements. The highlevel segment of CSD 12 was held from 28-30 April. Dr.
Prodipto Ghosh, Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
Forests led the Indian delegation to CSD-12. He stated
that the meeting had brought to fore the challenges faced
by developing countries and emphasised the need to adopt
and monitor the targets for means of implementation,
including provision of financial resources by State partners
and multilateral financial institutions and to address the
issue of transfer of necessary technologies to developing
countries.
The outcome of CSD-12 identified a number of
challenges, including mobilising resources from all sources,
facilitating the transfer of appropriate technologies and
capacity-building in developing countries. These aspects
will be addressed in the 13th session of CSD, to be held
in April 2005, for decisions on policy options and practical
measures.
Social, Human Rights & Humanitarian Issues
India participated and contributed actively in debates and
discussions in areas of social development and human
rights issues. The participation in debates by India on these
issues in the General Assembly, the ECOSOC and the
Functional Commissions was guided by its status as the
largest democracy in the world, as a developing country
and its commitment to the rule of law and the promotion
and protection of human rights. India also played a very
active role in the Regular Session of the NGO Committee.
Human Rights
In keeping with its traditional commitment to the human
rights system of the United Nations, India continued to

participate in the working of the principal human rights
bodies – the Commission on Human Rights (CHR), the
Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of
Human Rights, their subsidiary bodies and Working
Groups. Shri Soli Sorabjee, India’s representative in the
Sub-Commission was elected the Chairperson of the SubCommission at its 56th Session. A constructive dialogue
was maintained with the relevant Special Procedures and
Treaty bodies. India accepted the request of the Special
Rapporteur on the Right to Food to visit India on mutually
convenient dates.
The 60th session of the Commission on Human Rights
(CHR) was held in Geneva from 15 March-23 April 2004.
Foreign Secretary addressed the high level segment on
18 March 2004. India voted in favour of holding the
special sitting requested by the OIC on the situation
arising out of the assassination of Hamas leader Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin.
India continued to play a leading and balancing role at a
time of increasing politicization and polarization of this
important international forum. India participated actively
in negotiations on thematic resolutions, and besides cosponsoring many resolutions on a wide spectrum of
thematic issues, piloted two biennial resolutions - on
Advisory Services & Technical Cooperation and Tolerance
& Pluralism – which were adopted by consensus. In
tandem with other like minded delegations, India strongly
opposed, in some cases successfully, attempts to create or
indefinitely extend intrusive international monitoring
mechanisms in spheres such as internally displaced
persons, minorities, counter terrorism, etc.
Terrorism continued to be a subject of debate at the
Commission, in which India participated in keeping with
its well-founded approach that terrorists violate the most
fundamental of the human rights - the right to life.
Through constructive debate and discussions, India was
able to reflect some of its concerns in the Mexican
resolution on the issue and joined consensus.
The third and fourth sessions of the ad hoc Committee
on a Comprehensive and Integral International
Convention on Promotion and Protection of the Rights
and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities were held from
24 May to 4 June and 23 August to 3 September 2004.
India participated actively in the first reading of the draft
text prepared by the Working Group.
In November 2004, India signed the Optional Protocols
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on sale of

113

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

children, child prostitution and child pornography, and
on the involvement of children in armed conflicts.
A number of eminent Indians continued to serve as
members of important Treaty monitoring bodies and
human rights mechanisms. These include Shri P. N.
Bhagwati (Member of the Human Rights Committee),
Mrs. Chokila Iyer (Member of the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), Shri R. V. Pillai
(Member of the Committee on Elimination of Racial
Discrimination), and Shri Miloon Kothari (Special
Rapporteur on the Right to Adequate Housing). Shri
Arjun Sengupta’s mandate as the Independent expert on
the Right to Development came to an end.
Refugee, Migration and Disaster Reduction
India took part in the meetings of the Standing Committee
and informal consultations of the UN High Commission
for Refugees (UNHCR), as well as the Convention Plus
initiative of the High Commissioner. It also participated
in the annual 55th Session of the Executive Committee
of the Office of the UNHCR in October 2004. India
highlighted its historical tradition of hosting refugees and
commitment to the principle of non-refoulement. In its
interaction with the UNHCR, India articulated issues of
particular concern to developing countries which host the
bulk of refugees today, including the needs to address the
phenomenon of massive and mixed refugee flows, and
international burden sharing and responsibility. It also
highlighted the link between humanitarian assistance and
long-term development as a key input for preventive
strategies for refugee protection. India reiterated its
consistent position that durable solutions can only be
based on the consent of concerned countries, together
with an impartial, transparent and objective role of the
UNHCR.
Humanitarian Assistance
India continued to pilot, on behalf of the Group of 77,
the annual resolution on international cooperation in
humanitarian assistance for natural disasters, from relief
to development. The resolution adopted by the 59th
session of the General Assembly focussed on the issue of
resources and mandates the Secretary-General to prepare
a comprehensive report on this subject. A number of
developed countries also joined the Group of 77 in cosponsoring this resolution.The Indian delegation played
an active role in the preparations for the World
Conference on Disaster reduction held in Kobe in Japan
in January 2005.

Global Commission on International Migration
The Global Commission on International Migration
(GCIM) is a global panel which has been set up to address
the question of international migration. It was launched
with the support of UN Secretary General on 9 December
2003. Three Regional Hearings for Asia and the Pacific,
Mediterranean and Middle East and for Europe have been
held in Manila, Cairo and Budapest respectively. An interMinisterial delegation comprising of representatives of
Ministries of Labour, Home Affairs and Ministry of
External Affairs have been participating in the GCIM
hearings. Shri N. K. Singh, former Member, Planning
Commission is India’s representative to the GCIM.
India, as a country of destination, origin and transit, has
been able to put forward its concerns regarding the need
to make a distinction between legal and illegal migration,
the need to have non-discriminatory rules and regulations
for legal migrants and the need for more liberal
commitments on part of developed countries with regard
to admission of independent professionals and contractual
service suppliers at these meetings. The need to reach
agreement on more liberal commitments under Mode 4
of GATS was stressed by India at this meeting.

Specialized Bodies: Operational
Activities
Operational Activities of the UN System/UN
Funds and Programmes
India continued to play a significant and constructive role
in the work of the UN Funds and Programmes. Indian
efforts contributed to ensure that these organisations
continue to focus on their primary mandate of assisting
developing countries in their efforts for poverty eradication
and sustainable development without any dilution of the
principle of country-driven programming, in accordance
with national development plans and priorities. The
Indian delegation also contributed to resisting efforts for
introduction of conditionalities in the UN’s development
assistance programmes. India also made significant
contributions to the triennial comprehensive policy review
of the operational activities for development of the UN
system, undertaken during the 59th session of the UN
General Assembly.
United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD)
India actively participated in the UNCTAD XI
Conference held in Sao Paulo, Brazil from 13-18 June
2004. Shri Kamal Nath, Minister for Commerce and
Industry (CIM), led the Indian delegation. CIM addressed

114

United Nations and International Organisations

the plenary and held several bilateral meetings with his
counterparts on the sidelines of the Conference. The
Conference adopted a Ministerial Declaration – the Sao
Paulo Consensus – and a political message - the Spirit of
Sao Paulo. The Consensus document provided a policy
analysis of the current process of globalization and how
this will impact on developing countries. It is also perhaps
the first document to emanate from a multilateral forum
which specifically draws attention to the shrinking policy
space available to developing countries to pursue
development objectives in the light of increasing
commitments that they are being asked to assume
pursuant to multilateral trade and other negotiations. One
of the most significant developments of the UNCTAD
XI Conference was the launching of the Third Round of
negotiations under the Global System of Trade Preferences
among Developing Countries (GSTP).
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)/
UN Habitat
The 8th Special Session of the Governing Council/Global
Ministerial Environment Forum (GC/GMEF) of UNEP
was held in Jeju Island, Republic of Korea from 27 – 31
March 2004. The Indian delegation was led by Dr.
Prodipto Ghosh, Secretary (Environment & Forests).
India participated actively in this meeting. India has also
been participating in the meetings of the High-Level
Open-Ended Inter-governmental Working Group on an
Inter-governmental Strategic Plan for Technology Support
and Capacity-Building.
International Labour Conference
Minister of Labour Shri Sis Ram Ola led the Indian
delegation to the 92nd International Labour Conference
(ILC), which was held in Geneva from 1-17 June 2004.
Ministers for Labour from Maharashtra, Punjab and West
Bengal were also members of the Indian delegation. The
Indian delegation to the one-day 290th Session of the
Governing Body, which immediately followed the ILC,
was led by Secretary (Labour). The 92nd ILC focused its
attention on the Report on globalization by the World
Commission on Social Dimension of Globalisation,
presented in February 2004. Other issues discussed were
related to fishing, migration and human resources
development. The resolutions committee adopted a
resolution on the “promotion of gender equality, pay equity
and maternity protection”.
World Health Assembly (WHA)
Indian delegation to the 57th World Health Assembly

(WHA), held in Geneva from 17-22 May 2004, was led
by Director General of Health Services. Under the theme
“HIV/AIDS”, WHA focused on the “3 by 5” initiative of
the Director General of the World Health Organisation
(WHO). The Assembly adopted several important
resolutions in the sphere of health, such as “Global
Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health”, and the
“Strategy on Reproductive Health”. A two- day
presentation-cum-exhibition on traditional Indian
medicines was held like previous years on the margins of
the Assembly, in which eight Indian companies engaged
in the manufacture of such medicines participated.
World Meteorological Organsiation (WMO)
An Indian delegation led by Director General of the Indian
Meteorology Department Dr. S. K. Srivastava participated
in the 56th Session of the WMO held in Geneva from 818 June 2004.
United Nations Industrial Development
Organisation (UNIDO)
India has been participating in all important meetings of
the UNIDO including that of the Industrial development
Board (IDB), Programme and Budget Committee (PBC),
etc. The Indian delegation, in its interventions at the
meetings of IDB, highlighted the commitment of the
Indian Government to activities of UNIDO. The fact that
India is among the largest contributors to the UNIDO
was taken note of with appreciation in the statement made
by the G-77 and China. It was mentioned that with the
changing global requirements, UNIDO must emphasize
on Information and Communication Technologies and
their application for increasing the cost competitiveness
of SMEs and structure their programmes accordingly and
that India could contribute to structuring such
programmes through its capabilities in this sector. India
also pointed out that within the overall strategic
imperative of sustainable development and employment
generation, India had identified food processing, rural
industry, skills up-gradation and small hydro power plants
as among the focus areas for working together with
UNIDO for greater impact. In the context of the
discussion on South-South cooperation, India’s
commitment to working towards this goal by offering
Indian technology and expertise to other developing
countries was highlighted, including in specific sectors
such as biomass, small hydro power and manufacturing
technology for low cost and earthquake resistant housing.

115

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
India participated in the sessions of the Working Groups
of UNCITRAL on Procurement, Arbitration and
Conciliation, Transport Law, Electronic Commerce,
Security Interests held in Vienna during April-November
2004.
Economic and Social Council for Asia-Pacific
(ESCAP)
The Sixtieth session of the Commission was held at
Shanghai, China from 22-28 April 2004. The session
comprised two segments. The senior officials’ segment was
held from 22-24 April 2004 and the Ministerial segment
from 26-28 April 2004. The Indian delegation was led by
the Commerce Secretary, Shri Dipak Chatterjee. The
main theme of the Shanghai session was “Meeting the
challenges in an era of globalisation by strengthening
regional development cooperation”. The importance of
focusing on ESCAP work under its three thematic areas:
Poverty reduction, managing globalisation and addressing
emerging social issues was reaffirmed. The Shanghai
Declaration was adopted.
Commission on Narcotics Drugs
India participated in the 47 th regular Session of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) held in Vienna
from 15 to 22 March 2004, in which it was endorsed for
the Chairmanship of the 48th Session of CND. In the 47th
Session, India piloted with Turkey the traditional
resolution urging the international community to maintain
delicate balance between supply of, and demand for,
opiates for meeting medical and scientific needs. Australia
also joined as one of the co-sponsors of the resolution.
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice (CCPCJ)
India participated in the 13th Session of the Commission
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (CCPCJ), held
in Vienna from 11-20 May 2004 and contributed to
discussions, inter alia, on the preparations for the 11th UN
Congress scheduled in Bangkok for the period 18-25 April
2005. In this and other relevant activities and fora, India
underlined the need for importance of the outcome of
the forthcoming UN Congress for the future work of the
CCPCJ.
Group of 77
The Group of 77 met throughout the year to coordinate
the negotiating positions of the developing countries for

meetings of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and other bodies as well as for international
conferences/meetings and their preparatory processes.
Qatar chaired the Group of 77 during 2004. The twentyeighth Annual Meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the Group of 77 was held in New York on 30 September
2004, in which Shri Nirupam Sen, Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
participated. He outlined the difficulties faced by many
developing countries in their efforts to achieve their
development goals, in particular the Millennium
Development Goals, called on the developed countries
to fulfil their commitments, emphasised the need to
discuss, as an additionality in terms of finance for
development, non-traditional and innovative sources of
financing and reiterated India’s strong support for SouthSouth cooperation.
The Group of 77 met in Sao Paulo on 11-12 June 2004 to
commemorate the 40th Anniversary of the Group, on the
eve of the 11th session of the UN Conference on Trade
& Development. The Ministerial Declaration adopted on
this occasion reaffirmed the role of the Group in dealing
with international economic and development issues and
in advancing the economic interests of developing
countries and stressed the importance of strengthening
cooperation and coordination between the Group, China
and the Non-Aligned Movement. In its statement and
interaction, India highlighted the need for developing
countries to coordinate their position and present a united
front at multilateral trade negotiations so that these
processes could be adequately influenced in favour of
developing countries. India also reiterated its continued
commitment and contribution to strengthening SouthSouth cooperation.
High Level Exchanges
Shri Natwar Singh, External Affairs Minister, who visited
Geneva in the context of the meeting of India’s HOMs in
European countries, met the Acting High Commissioner
(AHC) for Human Rights and Director General (DG) of
the International Labour Organsiation (ILO). The Acting
High Commissioner (AHC) for Human Rights Mr.
Bertrand Ramcharan called on External Affairs Minister
in Geneva on 15 June 2004. External Affairs Minister
reiterated India’s commitment to promotion and
protection of human rights and highlighted the
significance India attaches to thematic issues and
international cooperation in this regard.
The DG of ILO Dr. Juan Samovia called on Minister of

116

United Nations and International Organisations

External Affairs in Geneva on 15 June 2004. During the
meeting they discussed India’s active role in the
Organization. Their discussions centred on India’s role in
ILO and also on the Report “A Fair Globalisation: Creating
Opportunities for All” brought out by the Commission
on Sustainable Development, constituted by the ILO
under the co-Chairmanship of the Presidents of Tanzania
and Finland.
Mr. Carlos Magarinos, Director General of UNIDO,
visited India from 15-23 September 2004. He called on
Ministers of External Affairs, Commerce & Industry,
Minister of State for Environment & Forests and Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission, and held discussions
with senior government officials during his visit. Mr. Abel
J. J. Rwendeire, Managing Director, Programme
Development and Technical Cooperation visited India
from 23-30 October 2004.
Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU)
The 111th Assembly of the Inter Parliamentary Union was
held in Geneva from 28 September – 1 October 2004. A
15-member Indian delegation headed by the Hon’ble
Speaker of the Lok Sabha Shri Somnath Chatterjee and
including Shri Suresh Pachouri, Minister of State for
Personnel, Public Grievances, Pensions and Parliamentary
Affairs participated. India was a member of the drafting
committee of the First Standing Committee on Peace and
International Security, with India’s Shri M. Salim as its
Rapporteur. India’s reservations on the resolution adopted
by the Assembly and also on the term ‘human security’
(agenda item 5) were placed on record. India’s
contribution towards IPU for the year 2005 is CHF 56730.
Elections
India was re-elected to the Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC) in October 2004 securing the highest number
of votes among all candidates for seats that were
contested. India received the support of 174 out of the
190 members of the General Assembly who were present
and voting. India was elected unopposed to the
Programme Coordination Board of the Joint UN
Programme on HIV/AIDS [UNAIDS]. During the year,
India’s candidate was also elected unopposed to the UN
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions (ACABQ).
India was elected to the Council of the International Civil
Aviation Organsiation under Part-II by elections held on
2 October 2004 during the 35th General Assembly of the
Organisation held in Montreal during 28 September-8
October 2004.

India was also elected to the Postal Operations Council
of the Universal Postal Union during the 23rd Congress
of the Union held in Bucharest, Romania in during 15
September- 5 October 2004.
Dr. Arjun Sengupta was nominated as the Independent
Expert on Human Rights and Extreme Poverty, a mandate
created by the Commission on Human Rights (CHR) in
1998 and extended by the CHR at its 60th Session in
April 2004. The mandate was confirmed by the Economic
and Social Council of the UN in July 2004.
Disarmament
India’s commitment to non-discriminatory and universal
nuclear disarmament and the global elimination of all
Weapons of Mass Destruction continued to be reflected
in its policy pronouncements and diplomatic initiatives.
The country’s stand on issues related to disarmament and
international security in various multilateral and regional
forums was premised on India’s national security interests
and its tradition of close engagement with the
international community to promote cooperative efforts
at addressing these challenges.
Bilateral dialogues with key countries continued to be
pursued this year and harmonisation of India’s national
imperatives and security obligations with international
concerns on non-proliferation and disarmament also
progressed steadily.
On the regional level, India’s participation in the
confidence and security building process and structure
under the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and
Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building
Measures in Asia (CICA) acquired greater momentum.
Regular contact was maintained with key international
and non-governmental organisations active in the field
of disarmament with a view to disseminating the Indian
perspectives on disarmament issues.
ASEAN Regional Forum
India took part in the work of the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF) through participation in the various meetings
organised under the aegis of the ARF, including the second
Inter-Sessional Meeting on Counter-Terrorism and
Transnational Crimes (ISM on CT-TC) held in Manila,
Philippines on 30-31 March 2004, the ARF Senior
Officials’ Meeting held in Yogyakarta, Indonesia in May
2004 which took stock of the developments and prepared
for the 11th ARF Ministerial Meeting in July; Workshops
on ‘Maritime Security’ organized by Indonesia, Malaysia

117

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

and the United States from 24-26 September 2004 in
Kualalumpur, Malaysia, on ‘Cyber-Security’ organised by
Republic of Korea from 7-8 October 2004 and the InterSessional Support Group Meeting on Confidence Building
Measures (ISG on CBMs) held in Phnom Penh from 2426 October 2004.
th

The 11 ARF Ministerial meeting was hosted by Indonesia
in Jakarta from 1-2 July 2004. External Affairs Minister
lead Indian delegation to this annual meeting. The issue
of terrorism and terrorist threat to the region as a whole
continued to dominate the ARF agenda. The Ministers
deliberated on ways and means to increase practical
cooperation among member states in this respect and
adopted a ‘Statement on Strengthening Transport
Security’, which calls for cooperative actions for
safeguarding transportation means from the terrorist
threats. The Ministers also adopted a Statement on Nonproliferation. Minister of External Affairs in his
intervention emphasized the need for a concerted fight
against global terrorism without any double standards or
equivocation and underlined the potential risks in its
linkages with proliferation of Weapons of Mass
Destruction.
United Nations General Assembly
India continued to play an active role on disarmament
issues in the First Committee of the UN General Assembly.
At the 59 th Session of the First Committee, India’s
Resolution on “Measures to Prevent Terrorists from
Acquiring Weapons of Mass Destruction”, was adopted
once again unanimously. India had first tabled this
Resolution at the 57th Session of the UNGA in 2002. At
the 59 th session, the number of co-sponsors for the
Resolution increased from 17 last year to 47, including
Japan, Russia and the UK. The Resolution reflects the
shared concern of the international community on the
threats posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and retains its continuing relevance as an
unambiguous statement from a truly universal and
democratic body like the UN General Assembly.
India reiterated commitment to its principled stand on
global nuclear disarmament based on the firm conviction
that progressively lower levels of armaments globally will
guarantee undiminished security for all. India believes that
its security would be enhanced in a nuclear-weapons-freeworld. With this commitment to global nuclear
disarmament, India re-introduced its Resolution
“Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear
Weapons” which was first introduced in 1982. This

Resolution calls upon the Conference on Disarmament
to commence negotiations on an international convention
prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons
under any circumstances, as a first step towards reducing
the salience of nuclear weapons.
India’s Resolution on “Reducing Nuclear Danger”, first
introduced in 1998, which calls for the review of nuclear
doctrines and immediate and urgent steps to reduce the
risk of unintentional and accidental use of nuclear
weapons, was also re-tabled.
India’s Resolution ‘Role of Science and Technology in the
Context of International Security and Disarmament’,
highlighted the qualitative aspects of the arms race, and
the need for a genuinely multilateral and nondiscriminatory response. India has maintained that
technology denial to responsible States does not serve the
objectives of non-proliferation but only signals a punitive
intent. All these resolutions were adopted by a good
majority as in previous years.
Conference on Disarmament
The Conference on Disarmament (CD), the ‘sole
multilateral disarmament treaty negotiating body’, held
three sessions during 2004 in Geneva on 19 January-26
March, 10 May-25 June and 26 July-10 September. Besides
the usual formal plenary meetings, the Conference held
this year structured informal plenary meetings on the
issues on CD’s existing agenda. India actively participated
in the deliberations on various proposals to end the
impasse in the CD over adoption of a Programme of Work.
During the course of consultations, India adopted a
flexible and constructive approach in order to contribute
to establishing a Programme of Work for the CD that
reflected the concerns and priorities of all its Member
States.
United Nations Disarmament Commission
(UNDC)
The UN Disarmament Commission is the only universal
forum with the mandate to deliberate on issues related to
disarmament and arms control and to make
recommendations to the General Assembly. The
Substantive Session of the UNDC in 2004 was held from
5-27 April 2004 in New York. The Commission could not
adopt its agenda as there was no consensus on the two
substantive issues that it could take up for its deliberations.
Though various proposals were made by the Non-aligned
Group, the European Union and the United States, there
was no convergence of views.

118

United Nations and International Organisations

International Atomic Energy Agency
The 48th Session of the General Conference of the IAEA
was held from 20 – 24 September 2004. The Indian
delegation was led by Dr. Anil Kakodkar, Chairman,
Atomic Energy Commission. As in the past few years, the
resolutions on strengthening of safeguards, security and
the safety of radioactive sources were the most
contentious. India endeavoured to maintain a balanced
approach in the GC resolution on ‘safeguards’ for all the
Member States of the Agency without discrimination. The
Indian delegation also contributed in great measure to
the scientific forum on nuclear fuel cycles and challenges.
India maintains support to the promotional role of the
IAEA, in particular, to IAEA’s on-going work on the
International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and
Fuel Cycles (INPRO). A case study on the Indian
Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR) was one the
14 case studies conducted under this project.
Dr. Mohamed El Baradei paid an official visit to India
from 13-16 November 2004. He delivered an inaugural
address at the 15 th annual conference of the Indian
Nuclear Society (INSAC –2004) at Mumbai on 15
November and had meetings with Chairman, Atomic
Energy Commission. During his stay in Delhi, he held
discussions with Foreign Secretary, National Security
Advisor and Minister of External Affairs on various issues
of mutual interest, including on the role of IAEA in
promoting access to nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes. During the discussions it was conveyed that
nuclear energy would continue to occupy an important
place in our energy mix, given our desire to sustain a fast
rate of economic growth. DG, IAEA averred that the work
of the Agency encompassed both the promotion of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and contribution to nonproliferation objectives. He appreciated India’s
technological prowess and its contribution to various
IAEA activities.
India continued to participate in several advisory groups
set up by the Director General, IAEA in technical and
policy areas including the Advisory Group on Security
(AdSec) and the recently established experts group on
the Multinationalisation of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle. India
also participated in the Global Threat Reduction Initiative
(GTRI) conference, organized by the US and Russia prior
to the 48th General Conference of the IAEA.
Chemical Weapons Convention
India continued to play an active role at the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) at The

Hague during the year. India is an original State Party to
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
India was successfully re-elected to the Executive Council
of the OPCW at the Ninth Conference of the States
Parties to the CWC held at The Hague from 29 November
– 3 December 2004. India effectively engaged in the
deliberations and decision-making particularly the
implementation of the Action Plans on Article VII
(National Implementation Measures) of the Convention
and universal adherence to the Convention. India
highlighted all issues of concern to us and to other
developing countries during this Conference and also the
meetings of the Executive Council.
India continued to fulfil all its commitments under the
Convention. Having declared possession of chemical
weapons to the OPCW in 1997, India’s destruction efforts
have been proceeding well ahead of the destruction
timelines stipulated under the Convention, under the
OPCW inspections. Mr. Roglio Pfirter, Director General
of the Organisation for Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) visited India from 28 March – 4 April 2004. In
the various interactions, India’s continued interest in the
success of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
and its full and effective implementation was reiterated.
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention
The Second Annual Meeting of the States Parties to the
BWC was held in Geneva from 6-10 December 2004 to
discuss and promote common understanding and effective
action on: (i) Enhancing international capabilities for
responding to, investigating and mitigating the effects of
cases of alleged use of biological or toxin weapons or
suspicious outbreaks of disease; and (ii) Strengthening
and broadening national and international institutional
efforts and existing mechanisms for the surveillance,
detection, diagnosis and combating of infectious diseases
affecting humans, animals, and plants. India has been
supportive of this process of annual meeting of States
Parties of the BTWC and believes that these meetings
can play an important role in promoting common
understanding among states parties through exchange of
views and national experiences. A Meeting of Experts was
held from 19-30 July 2004 at Geneva to prepare for the
Meeting of States Parties. The Indian delegation actively
participated in the deliberations at the Meeting of Experts
and made detailed country presentations.
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
India is a High Contracting Party to the Convention on

119

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Prohibitions Or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which may be Deemed to be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects
(CCW) and has ratified all its protocols, currently in force,
including the Amended Protocol II on prohibitions or
restrictions on the use of Mines, booby traps and other
devises.
The Second Review Conference of the States Parties to
the Convention on CCW held in 2001 had decided to
establish an Open-ended Group of Governmental Experts
to discuss in two separate Working Groups (a) ways and
means to address the issue of Explosive Remnants of War
and (b) Mines Other Than Anti-personnel Mines. Three
sessions of the Group of Governmental Experts were held
in 2004. India’s Permanent Representative to the CD, was
nominated by the NAM Group as the Coordinator for
the Meetings of the Working Group on Explosive
Remnants of War. A Meeting of States Parties to the CCW
was held at Geneva from 18-19 November 2004. The
Meeting decided that the Group of Governmental Experts
will continue its work in 2005. It also decided with the
recommendation of NAM Group that India will continue
to coordinate the Meetings of the Working Group on
Explosive Remnants of War in 2005.
The Annual Meeting of the States Parties to the Amended
Protocol II to the Convention on CCW on Prohibitions
or restrictions on the use of mines, booby traps and other
deivises was also held at Geneva on 17 November 2004.
India informed the Meeting about the steps taken by it to
implement the provisions of Amended Protocol II and its
commitment to the vision of a world free of landmines.
India remains committed to the objective of a nondiscriminatory, universal and global ban on anti-personnel
land mines through a phased process that addresses the
legitimate defence requirements of the states while
ameliorating the critical humanitarian crisis that has
resulted from an indiscriminate transfer and use of land
mines. India participated as an “Observer” in the First
Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines (APLs)
and on their Destruction (Ottawa Convention), held in
Nairobi, Kenya from 29 November – 3 December 2004,
as it shares the humanitarian concerns arising out of
indiscriminate use of APLs, though it is not a party to
this convention, as it fails to take into account the
legitimate security interests of countries which
necessitates the usage of landmines for defensive purposes
within valid security norms and in accordance with

internationally acknowledged and well defined safety
parameters.
Small Arms and Light Weapons
India is acutely aware of the problem of proliferation of
and illicit trafficking in small arms and remains committed
to participating actively in international search for
effective solutions, including the implementation of the
Programme of Action (PoA) adopted at the UN
Conference on Illicit Trafficking in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in July 2001.
India’s Permanent Representative to the Conference on
Disarmament chaired the Group of Governmental Experts
on Tracing and Marking of Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons, established by the UN Secretary General
pursuant to the Resolution 56/24 V of the UN General
Assembly. The Group of Governmental Experts had
recommended by consensus that it was both desirable and
feasible to develop an international instrument to enable
States to identify and trace in a timely and reliable manner
illicit small arms and light weapons. This recommendation
was endorsed by the 58th session of the General Assembly
in 2003.
An Open Ended Working Group to negotiate an
instrument to identify and trace in a timely and reliable
manner illicit small arms and light weapons has been
established. The First Substantive Session of the OpenEnded Working Group established by the Secretary
General to negotiate an instrument on marking and
tracing of small arms and light weapons was held at New
York from 14-25 June 2004. The Indian delegation, led
by Ambassador/PR to the CD, made a series of technical
presentations on various elements of a future instrument
and, thereby, helped shape the discussions within the
Group. India will remain constructively engaged in the
negotiating process, which will continue actively in 2005.
Outer Space Affairs
The 47th Session of the UN Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (UN COPUOS) was held in Vienna
from 2 to 11 June 2004. The Indian delegation statement
highlighted the Indian Space programmes, contribution
of India to international cooperation and also made a
presentation on role of space technology in Disaster
Management. India effectively coordinated with both the
developing and developed countries on various issues and
successfully represented and safeguarded its interests. The
Committee also reviewed and endorsed the report of the
43rd Session of the Legal Sub-Committee, which had held
its meeting earlier.

120

United Nations and International Organisations

Conference on Interaction and Confidence
Building Measures in Asia
The Ministerial meeting of the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA) took
place in Almaty, Kazakhstan on 22 October 2004. External
Affairs Minister led Indian delegation to this meeting.
Apart from India, delegations of China, Russia, Kyrgyzstan
and Tajikistan were represented by their Foreign Ministers.
Thailand FM also participated as Thailand was inducted
as the latest full member of the CICA at this meeting,
thus becoming the first South East Asian country to be a
member of CICA. The Meeting adopted a “CICA
Catalogue of Confidence Building Measures” and “CICA
Rules of Procedure”. Considerations of aspects related to
the establishment of a Secretariat were deferred for the
Summit, which would be held in 2006, for want of
consensus. The Catalogue of CBMs contains a number of
CBMs which member states can adopt on a voluntary
and gradual basis. These cover the politico-military
sphere, new challenges and threats as well as social,
economic and humanitarian spheres. At the end of the
meeting a Joint Declaration was also adopted by the
Ministers, which covers a number of issues including
terrorism, WMD proliferation, Afghanistan, Iraq and
Middle East.
External Affairs Minister in his speech at the plenary
meeting noted the progress made by CICA and
emphasised that peace and prosperity in Asia and beyond
could only be ensured through a cooperative approach
building on the strengths of each other. Minister of
External Affairs highlighted the fact that terrorism posed
a serious challenge and called on member states to
eliminate it through a comprehensive and sustained effort.
He also noted that given the diversity of Asia measures
to promote greater social and economic interaction should
be the first priority.

International Law and Developments
Sixth (Legal) Committee of the UN General
Assembly
During the current session, the Sixth Committee of the
General Assembly considered various important items,
which inter alia include the following: Responsibility of
States, Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States
and their Property, Reports of the UNCITRAL,
International Criminal Court, Report of the Special
Committee on the Charter of the UN, Measures to
Eliminate Terrorism, Legal Protection under the
Convention on the Safety of the UN and Associated

Personnel and the International Convention against the
Reproductive Cloning of Human Beings.
The Sixth Committee further adopted two legal
instruments during this session namely, the Convention
on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and their Property
and also the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law.
The General Assembly on the recommendation of the
Sixth Committee decided to accord observer Status in
the General Assembly to the South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, Southern African
Development Community, Collective Security Treaty
Organization, Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
and the Economic Community of West African Sates.
The General Assembly considered the draft articles on
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts
prepared by the ILC. During the discussion, different views
were expressed as to the eventual form of the draft articles.
Several speakers spoke in favour of convening an
international conference of plenipotentiaries to negotiate
an international convention. Some even suggested
establishing an ad hoc Committee or Working Group to
commence the preparatory work towards such a
conference. Other speakers expressed doubts as to the
necessity of enshrining the articles in a convention,
especially since some of the provisions have already come
to be accepted as part of general international law. Further
consideration has been deferred to till the 62nd session
of the General Assembly, so as to give more time to States
to understand the legal intricacies involved in draft articles
and its implications thereof.
The Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States
and their Property recognizes the principle that States
and their entities do not enjoy jurisdictional immunity
from the courts of other countries in respect of their
commercial transactions.
A decision was taken by the General Assembly to continue
the work of the enlargement of the scope of the
Convention on Safety of the United Nations and
Associated Personnel including, inter alia, by means of a
legal instrument.
International Criminal Court
The International Criminal Court has become functional
at The Hague after the entry into force of the Rome
Statute. There are 139 signatories to the Statute out of
which 97 countries have ratified it. The Assembly of State

121

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Parties has adopted the Elements of Crime and the Rules
of Procedure and Evidence prepared earlier by the
Preparatory Commission. The Assembly of State Parties
has also elected 18 judges for the Court and its Prosecutor.
The Office of the Prosecutor (OTP) has currently opened
two investigations in Africa. Two States Parties, the
Republic of Uganda and the Democratic Republic of
Congo, have referred situations to the Chief Prosecutor
Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo. After rigorous analysis, the
Prosecutor has decided to open investigations into both
situations.
Human Cloning
The ad hoc Committee, which was established by the
General Assembly to elaborate the international
convention on Human Cloning, was unable to resolve
the scope of the Convention. One group of States wanted
to ban all types of human cloning immediately. Other
States, including India supported the proposal for the
elaboration of an international instrument prohibiting
reproductive cloning immediately, and discussion and
elaboration of a legal instrument regarding all other forms
of cloning including the therapeutic cloning on a stepby-step basis, leaving States the freedom to take decision
whether or not to allow therapeutic cloning in their
country.
Special Committee on the UN Charter
The Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization considered several proposals on:
maintenance of international peace and security; peaceful
settlement of disputes between States; the Trusteeship
Council; coordination with other committees etc.
concerning the maintenance of international peace and
security, in particular with regard to assistance to third
States adversely affected by sanctions. India’s stand over
the years has been that the Security Council should hold
the primary responsibility towards the affected third
States, as a part of the sanctions imposing decisions. The
Council should establish a ‘Trust Fund’ for that purpose
based on the scale applicable to the peacekeeping
operations as well as voluntary contributions.
Comprehensive Convention on International
Terrorism
It may be recalled that the draft Comprehensive
Convention on International Terrorism is being
considered within the framework of a Working Group of
the Sixth Committee since 2000 on the basis of a draft

proposed by India. Though, in principle, agreement has
been reached on major draft articles, a few outstanding
issues remain that include: Article 2 (definition of
offence), Article 2 bis (relationship with prior sectoral
conventions) and Article 18 (exclusion of actions of
security forces of a State). However, the main outstanding
issue relates to the proposal to exclude from the
application of the Convention acts against “foreign
occupation”.
IMO Legal Committee
One of the important agenda items before the Legal
Committee of the International Maritime Organisation
(IMO)is the consideration of Draft Protocol to the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
the Safety of Maritime Navigation, 1988. This initiative
was taken by IMO in the aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist
attacks on US in 2000. The draft Protocol prepared by
USA proposes amendments to the SUA Convention
aiming to incorporate issues that are not connected with
terrorism per- se, but are aimed at incorporating
disarmament and non-proliferation issues including the
incorporation of “proliferation security initiative”. India
opposed these amendments and recorded its reservations
during the 88 Session of the Legal Committee as also
during the IMO Council Meeting. India also made
reservations on certain aspects relating to the mandate
of the Legal Committee and on the discussion of the NPT
related principles within the scope of the proposed
amendment exercise.
Oceans and Law of the Sea
The work under this item in the UN General Assembly
focused on dual themes: first, harmonizing national
legislation with the provisions of the UN Convention on
the Law of the Sea, 1982 and second, the protection of
marine biological diversity. The highlight of this year’s
oceans resolution is the establishment of a Working Group
to study issues relating to the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction, as destructive practices need to be addressed
both within exclusive economic zones and beyond.
However, the areas beyond national jurisdiction present
particular legal and logistical challenges for the
international community. In preparation for the meeting
of the Working Group in early 2006, the Secretariat will
prepare a report on these issues.
UNCITRAL
The Working Group of the United Nations Commission

122

United Nations and International Organisations

on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) relating to
Insolvency Law adopted a Draft Legislative Guide during
this year. The Legislative Guide includes a comprehensive
statement of key objectives and core features for a strong
insolvency regime including out-of-court restructuring.
The crucial task in designing a general insolvency law is
to balance the priorities of various interests in the process
of liquidation. The recommendations in the guide have
tried to achieve this delicate balance.
The Working Group on Transport Law is presently
negotiating a new convention, with a view to reviewing
the existing laws relating to the international carriage of
goods by sea and other modes, to cope with the practical
changes due to technological developments. It would be
predominantly a convention pertaining to Carriage of
Goods by Sea having multimodal character. At the
fourteenth session, discussion was held on issues relating
to the liability for the damage to or loss of goods during
the carriage, freedom of contract, and jurisdiction and
arbitration for the purpose of settling disputes, which may
arise out of the interpretation or application of the
provisions of the proposed convention.
International Hydrographic Organization
This Division participated in the restructuring of the
Convention on International Hydrographic Organization
(IHO). Towards this end, a Strategic Planning Working
Group (SPWG) has been established to revive and enlarge
the 1956 Convention establishing the IHO, as well as its
General and Financial Regulations. This year the Division
participated in the fifth and final meeting of the SPWG
held in Tokyo. The outcome of the Meeting would be
discussed at the extraordinary conference of the IHO to
be held in April 2005.
AALCO
The Annual Conference of the Asian African Legal
Consultative Organisation (AALCO) for the year 2004
was held at Bali from 21-25 June 2004. During the
conference, the Organization discussed several
contemporary issues of international law: (i) Report on
Matters relating to the work of the International Law
Commission at its Fifty-fifth Session, (ii) The International
Criminal Court: Recent Developments, and (iii)
Expressions of Folklore and its International Protection.
A special one-day session considered in depth the issues
relating to Trafficking in Persons especially Women and
Children.

Free Trade Agreements
Pursuant to the Free Trade Agreement with MERCOSUR,
agreements on Rules of Origin, Safeguard Measures and
Dispute Settlement Procedures as well as the two lists of
products for exchange of concessions were finalized.
Negotiations were held pursuant to the SAFTA for
finalization of agreements on Rules of Origin, finalization
of lists of products for exchange of concessions, mechanism
for compensation of revenue losses to the LDCs, provision
of technical assistance and reconciliation of SAFTA
provisions for smooth implementation of Trade
Liberalization Programme. Free Trade Agreement among
BIMSTEC countries was signed during this year.
Discussions over Free Trade Agreements with ASEAN
and Thailand and Framework Agreements with South
African Customs Union, and with Gulf Cooperation
Council are at various stages of consideration.
Investments
Under the auspices of SAARC, this Division has also
participated in the negotiations aiming to conclude a
SAARC Agreement on Promotion and Protection of
Investments. During this year, Bilateral Investment
Promotion Agreement (BIPA) negotiations were held with
Latvia and Uruguay. However, bilateral discussions with
Bosnia Herzegovina, Azerbaijan, Senegal, Slovak
Republic, Papua New Guinea and Tunisia are at various
stages. The text has been finalized for establishing the
SAARC Arbitration Council, which will have competence
in settling investment related and other legal disputes in
the region and the agreement is expected to be signed in
the forthcoming meeting of the SAARC Summit.
Private International Law
The Division is examining the Hague Conventions on
Private International Law for the purpose of India’s
becoming a party to them. This would help the Indian
courts and parties to suits in seeking international
cooperation in several civil law areas from other States
parties to these conventions. As a result, India has
deposited the Instrument of Accession for The Hague
Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legalization
for Foreign Public Documents, 1961. Accession to the
Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extra
Judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, 1965,
and the Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad
in Civil or Commercial Matters, 1970 is under process.
The issue of becoming a party to the Hague Convention
on International Child Abduction 1980 is under active
consideration.

123

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Participation of Legal and Treaties Division in
the Development of International Law
This Division participated in the Inter-Governmental
Experts meeting on the UNESCO’s Preliminary draft
Convention on the Protection of the Diversity of Cultural
Contents and Artistic Expressions. It also participated in
the Drafting Committee meetings held in Paris, as well as
in the Inter-Governmental Experts Group Meeting on the
Elaboration of a Regional Cooperation Agreement for the
Suppression of Piracy and Armed Robbery in Asia, held
in Tokyo.
This Division also participated in the JWG Meeting
between India and the UK to discuss and strengthen the
issues relating to peace-keeping; the JWG meeting
between India and Israel on combating terrorism; and the
Working Group meeting of BIMSTEC Countries on
Counter Terrorism.
The L&T Division participated in bilateral negotiations
for concluding extradition treaties, agreements on mutual
legal assistance in criminal and in civil matters with foreign
countries. As a result, extradition treaties with Kuwait,
Republic of Korea, Bahrain, the Philippines were signed.
Treaties with Nepal and Oman have been finalized and
are ready for signing. Further, treaties with Israel, Malaysia
and Senegal are under negotiation. As regards mutual legal
assistance in criminal matters, agreements were negotiated
and finalized with Bahrain, Hong Kong, and Singapore.
Agreements with Nepal, Azerbaijan, Germany, Bulgaria,
Turkmenistan, Egypt and Malaysia are under negotiation.
Agreements in mutual legal assistance in civil matters were
finalized with Bahrain and Kazakhstan.
The Division examined several extradition requests and
other requests for international cooperation received from
the domestic as well as foreign jurisdictions and rendered
legal advice therein.
This Division participated in bilateral talks with Pakistan
on issues relating to Tulbal Navigation Project, Baglihar
Project and Kishanganga Project to discuss technical issues
and application of relevant provisions of the Indus Water
Treaty.
This Division examined the extension of the ‘Dual
Citizenship’ scheme to the PIOs (Persons of Indian
Origin), taking into account the compatibility of the legal
position with regard to dual nationality and the
concentration of the Indian Diaspora.

This Division provided opinion on Cabinet notes relating
to: Accession to the World Custom Union; Establishing a
National Clean Development Mechanism Authority
(CDMA) under the Kyoto Protocol; Accession to the
Rotterdam Convention on PIC Procedures relating to
Pesticides and Chemicals.
Further it also provided opinion on matters relating to
the Commonwealth, Antarctica, acceding to Hague
Conventions on Private International Law, International
Whaling Convention, Parliament Questions,
International Humanitarian Law, human rights, refugees,
speech of IHL for the Indian delegation attending the
111th International Parliamentary Union meeting,
environmental aspects of oil exploration in the territorial
sea and EEZ of India etc. It also dealt with various
Parliament Questions on the subject of international law.
Various other international legal issues and cases, in
particular before the Indian courts, relating to the
application of Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations, 1961; Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations, 1963; Passport related matters under the
provisions of the Passports Act, 1967; Section 86 of the
Indian Civil Procedure Code requiring the consent of the
Central Government before suing the foreign government
in Indian Courts were examined.
India has signed/ratified many multilateral/bilateral
treaties/agreements entered into by India with foreign
countries during the year. These inter alia include Social
Charter of the SAARC; the Additional Protocol to the
SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of
Terrorism; Agreement on South Asian Free Trade Area
(SAFTA); Intergovernmental Agreement on the Asian
Highway Network adopted by the UN Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and Pacific; WHO Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control; Convention Abolishing
the Requirement of Legalization for Foreign Public
Documents; Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict; Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child
Prostitution and Child Pornography. A comprehensive list
is placed at Appendix IX. A list of Instruments of Full
Powers issued during the year 2004 is at Appendix X and
a list of Instruments of Ratification is at Appendix XI.

124

Multilateral Economic Relations

D

uring the period under review, India continued its
efforts to increase its integration with the world economy,
particularly with the economies of Asia. India also played
an active role in furthering the economic interests of other
developing countries in various international organizations
and multilateral, regional and sub-regional groupings.
India’s “Look East” policy, which was initiated in 1992,
added a new dimension by successfully organising the first
India-ASEAN Car Rally 2004.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the 3rd India-ASEAN (Association of South
East Asian Nations) Summit held in Vientiane, Laos on
29-30 November 2004. The 3rd India-ASEAN Summit
marked a maturing of the multi-faceted relationship and
put in place the framework for a long-term partnership
with ASEAN. The Summit demonstrated mutual interest
in strengthening India-ASEAN relations, which are
rooted in deep historical and cultural ties. A mutual desire
to expand cooperation in political, security, technological
and economic areas was also evident.
The Summit adopted the “India-ASEAN Partnership for
Peace, Progress and Shared Prosperity” document which
sets out the vision for future cooperation between India
and ASEAN. The salient features of the document and
the Plan of Action annexed to it include cooperation for
strengthening and reforming the UN system, cooperation
in WTO and other multilateral fora, combating the
menace of international terrorism and transnational
crimes, disarmament, development of regional and
subregional infrastructure, capacity building and human
resources development. On the sidelines of the Summit,
the Prime Minister held bilateral meetings with leaders
of Australia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Laos, Singapore and
Vietnam.
At the Summit, ASEAN leaders expressed appreciation
for support provided by India to CLMV countries
(Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Vietnam) for
bridging the development gaps in ASEAN. The Minister

10

for External Affairs inaugurated the Lao-India
Entrepreneurship Developmental Centre (LIEDC)
established with Indian assistance in Vientiane on 27
November 2004. Similar EDCs in the other CLMV
countries are expected to be ready by 2005. PM
announced that India would replenish the India-ASEAN
Cooperation Fund, which funds agreed projects between
India and ASEAN, by an additional contribution of US $
2.5 million. He also conveyed his support, in principle, to
the newly set up ASEAN Development Fund.
The Third ASEAN-India Business Summit was held from
19-21 October 2004 at New Delhi and Chennai. Prime
Minister delivered the inaugural address. Sectoral Sessions
were held on Tourism, Infrastructure (roads, ports,
airports, and urban infrastructure), Financial Services and
Biotechnology at New Delhi and on Agriculture & Food
Processing, IT & ITES, Engineering & Manufacturing,
Healthcare & Pharmaceuticals at Chennai. The events
were well attended.
The first India-ASEAN Car Rally was flagged off by Prime
Minister at Guwahati on 22 November 2004. The second
leg of the Rally was flagged off by all ASEAN leaders
together with the Prime Minister at Vientiane on 30
November 2004. The Rally concluded at Batam,
Indonesia on 11 December 2004. This initiative has
generated enormous public interest in India-ASEAN
relations and it is expected that it would promote
connectivity, as well as enhance trade, investment, tourism
and people-to-people links between India and ASEAN.
The year also witnessed expansion of India-ASEAN
functional cooperation in areas of mutual interest,
including IT, Space and Science and Technology. An
ASEAN Exploratory Study Mission in Information
Technology visited India from 30 March-2 April 2004.
The areas of cooperation which were identified include
Cyber security, ICT, Human Resources Development, IT
project for disabled, e-Commerce and Wi-max for rural
areas.The ASEAN-India Working Group on Science and

125

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Technology met in Singapore on 11 June 2004. Discussions
were held to promote further cooperation in the areas of
Advanced Materials, Biotechnology, and Information
Technology. A training course under the first phase of
ASEAN-India Cooperation in Space was conducted at
the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun from
24 May to 4 June 2004. Participants from eight ASEAN
countries attended the training course. The areas
identified for cooperation in the initial stages are capacity
building and use of Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) data for
environmental management.

Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral
Technical and Economic Cooperation
(BIMSTEC)
The first BIMSTEC Summit held in Bangkok, Thailand
on 31 July was a watershed event for the sub-regional
grouping. The Summit was attended by the President of
Sri Lanka and Prime Ministers of Bangladesh, Bhutan,
India, Myanmar, Nepal and Thailand. Nepal and Bhutan
joined the grouping in February 2004. The Summit was
preceded by meetings of senior officials and Foreign
Ministers of the member nations.
As an outcome of the Summit, the name of the grouping
was changed from BIMST-EC to BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal
Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic
Cooperation). The Declaration which was adopted by the
Summit, places special emphasis on cooperation in the
sectors of trade and investment, transport and
communications, tourism, energy, human resources
development, agriculture, fisheries, science and
technology and people to people contacts. It was also
agreed to expand the cooperation into areas of public
health, education, rural community development, small
and medium scale enterprises, construction, environment,
information and communications technology,
biotechnology, weather and climate research and natural
disaster mitigation and management. The Summit
attached importance to the development of transport and
communication infrastructure, hydropower and
hydrocarbon projects and intra BIMSTEC
interconnectivity of electricity and natural gas grids. Joint
development of BIMSTEC tourism packages, introduction
of BIMSTEC Travel Card/Visa, coordination of efforts of
member countries in combating the menace of
international terrorism and transnational crimes,
promotion of exchanges of parliamentarians, media

persons, students and faculty, sports persons etc were also
agreed upon by the Summit. India offered to host
ministerial meetings in Energy and Tourism in 2005 and
the 2nd Summit in 2006.
The first meeting of BIMSTEC Trade Negotiating
Committee (TNC) took place in Bangkok on 7-8
September 2004 to finalise the Terms of Reference
(TORs). It was followed by the first meeting of BIMSTEC
Task Force on 9 September 2004 to review various sectors
of cooperation. The 2nd meeting of the TNC and a
meeting of the Working Group on Rules of Origin were
held in New Delhi from 6-8 December 2004.
The first meeting of Chief Executives of Railways of
BIMSTEC countries was jointly organised in New Delhi
by the Ministry of Railways and the Asian Institute of
Transport Development (AITD), New Delhi from 20-21
September 2004. This was in pursuance of
recommendations of the Expert Group Meeting held in
New Delhi in 2001 to address issues relating to
development of rail networks, status of Trans-Asian
Railway routes, harmonization of technologies and human
resource development in the BIMSTEC member
countries. The Meeting stressed the need to create a
genuinely regional cooperative effort aimed at human
resource development. The meeting recommended that
a new institutional arrangement, supported by an adequate
corpus of funds, be set up. AITD has offered to contribute
Rs. 20 lakhs as seed capital for this purpose, to be
supplemented by contributions from member countries
and grants from multilateral bodies. The Indian Railways
have offered to train railway personnel from member
countries free of cost. The next meeting of Chief
Executives of Railways of BIMSTEC countries will be held
in Myanmar.
The 1st meeting of the BIMSTEC Joint Working Group
on Counter Terrorism was held in New Delhi from 9-10
December 2004. The terms of Reference and “Mandate”
for the Joint Working Group were adopted at this meeting.

Indian Ocean Rim Association for
Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC)
The fifth Meeting of the Council of Ministers (COM) of
the Indian Ocean Rim- Association for Regional
Cooperation (IOR-ARC) was held in Colombo from 2627 August 2004. The meeting of the COM was preceded
by the meetings of the Indian Ocean Rim Academic Group

126

Multilateral Economic Relations

External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh calls on the President of Republic of Korea Mr. Roh Moo-hyun during his visit to India,
4-6 October 2004.

From left to right: Prime Ministers of Nepal, Myanmar, President of Sri Lanka and Prime Ministers of Thailand, India, Bhutan and
Bangladesh during the 1st BIMSTEC Summit Meeting.

127

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

(IORAG), Indian Ocean Rim Business Forum (IORBF),
Working Group on Trade and Investment (WGTI), and
Committee of Senior Officials (CSO). The Indian
delegation was led by Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State
for External Affairs. A new concept of fast track
implementation of projects was agreed upon at the 5th
COM. This envisages a “5+” approach, meaning thereby
that projects involving at least five Member states would
be undertaken as IOR-ARC projects.
India organised an E-Commerce Round Table from 1112 August 2004 as an Indian Ocean Rim Business Forum
project. The Department of Science and Technology in
cooperation with The Energy Research Institute (TERI)
would organise a Workshop on Disaster Mitigation and
Management in 2005, an offer from India accepted by
the 5th COM. A workshop on entrepreneurship
development for small, medium and micro enterprises for
interested member states will also be organized by India.

India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA)
The first Meeting of Science and Technology Ministers
of IBSA (India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue Forum) was
held in New Delhi on 25 October 2004. The meeting
identified four main thrust areas for initiating cooperation
viz.: (a) development of vaccines for AIDS, TB and
Malaria, (b) application of biotechnology in health and
agriculture, (c) nano-science and technology, and (d)
oceanographic sciences. It was also decided that IBSA
Science and Technology meetings will be held annually
while the Working Group on Science and Technology
would meet every six months.The second meeting of the
IBSA Focal Points was held in New Delhi from 29-30
November 2004 to review developments and prepare for
the 2nd meeting of the Trilateral Commission.

MGC
The Mekong-Ganga Cooperation (MGC) is an initiative
launched in Vientiane in November 2000 by six countries
- India and five ASEAN countries, namely, Cambodia,
Lao PDR, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam for enhancing
cooperation in tourism, education, culture, and transport
and communications. As part of Delhi-Hanoi rail link
under MGC, a feasibility study by RITES Ltd. was initiated
in September 2004 for the Jiribam (Manipur)-Mandalay
(Myanmar) missing rail route. As part of cooperation in
culture, a Museum of Traditional Textiles of MGC

countries is being set up in Siem Reap, Cambodia by the
Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR).

G-15
As a founder member of the Group of Fifteen (G-15),
India played an active role in various G-15 projects and
activities, in order to promote economic and technical
cooperation among the G-15 countries. India is
coordinating a number of G-15 projects, viz. solar energy
applications, establishment of gene banks for medicinal
and aromatic plants, and an Entrepreneurship and
Technical Development Centre in Senegal (ETDC). The
project for the revival of Nigeria Machine Tools, assisted
by India at a cost of US$5 million is nearing completion.

OECD
India’s interaction with the OECD (Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development) has intensified
considerably over the years. The Department of Industrial
Policy & Promotion (DIPP) and OECD hosted the Global
Forum on International Investment (GFII) from19-21
October 2004. This is an open forum for policy dialogue
among OECD members, non-members and other
stakeholders worldwide. The meeting allowed participants
to share their perspectives on the issue of international
investment flows.

SAARC
Following the tsunami tragedy, Bangladesh the host of
the Thirteenth SAARC Summit, postponed the meeting
from January to 6-7 February 2005. India took a decision
not to attend the Thirteenth Summit in Dhaka on the
scheduled dates against the background of the then
prevailing situation in our neighbourhood, which had
caused us grave concern. India reiterates its continuing
and consistent commitment to the SAARC process, and
to increased regional cooperation among Member States
and maintains that it is only in an environment free from
political turmoil and violence that a Summit would yield
the desired outcome.
The Twelfth SAARC Summit in January 2004 in
Islamabad witnessed the signing of three documents, the
SAARC Social Charter, an Additional Protocol on
Terrorism and a framework Agreement on SAFTA. India
offered to contribute US$ 100 million for Poverty
Alleviation projects in SAARC countries (outside India).

128

Multilateral Economic Relations

As mandated by the Twelfth Summit, the Independent
South Asian Commission on Poverty Alleviation
(ISACPA) prepared a report setting out SAARC
Developmental Goals (SDGs) for the next five years in
the areas of poverty alleviation, education, health and
environment. The ISACPA Report was launched in
different SAARC capitals through the year 2004. India
launched the ISACPA Report on 21 December 2004. A
Regional Poverty Profile-2004, the second such report,
detailing economic indicators of SAARC member
countries is to be presented at the Thirteenth Summit in
Dhaka.

programmes to implement the goals of the SAARC
Social Charter, as well as consult with each other to
promote collaborative Poverty Alleviation Projects,
including under the SAARC Poverty Alleviation
Fund. [Ministry of Statistics & Programme
Implementation has been identified as the nodal
focal point for cooperation with SAARC
counterparts].
v)

As part of the SAARC Awareness Year for TB and
HIV/AIDS, India offered to host a meeting this year
of experts and community workers, train paramedics
from the SAARC countries, and also offered to send
medical vans and mobile awareness units to each of
the SAARC countries. [A project is under
preparation by National Aids Control Organisation
(NACO), in consultation with the Ministry of
External Affairs, for implementing this project].

vi)

India has offered training in the field of statistics.
[India has asked SAARC Secretariat to suggest dates
suitable to member countries for holding the first
meeting towards implementing this proposal].

Proposals by India
At the 25th Council of Ministers Meeting in Islamabad,
July 2004, India made the following significant proposals:
[the status report on each proposal is given in brackets]
i)

Setting up a South Asian Parliamentary Forum: India
sought to set up a South Asian Parliamentary Forum
to deliberate on issues pertaining to regional
cooperation endeavours under SAARC, and offered
to host the next meeting of the Forum. [India will
be hosting a meeting of the Forum during the Budget
Session 2005].

ii)

Establishment of a SAARC High Economic Council
formed with the Finance and Planning Ministers of
the SAARC Member Countries to promote ideas
and initiatives related to regional economic
integration in economic, trade, financial and
monetary areas. [The 4th SAARC Commerce
Ministers Meeting in Islamabad, 20-23 November
2004 conveyed approval for Member States to send
their comments to the Secretariat for consideration
during the Thirteenth Meeting of the Committee
on Economic Cooperation to be held in Bangladesh
at a date to be decided in 2005].

iii)

Setting up of a SAARC Infrastructure Fund, for major
infrastructure projects in the region. [The 4 th
SAARC Commerce Ministers Meeting in Islamabad,
20-23 November 2004 approved that in the first
instance, advice of SAARCFINANCE (a body
comprising Governors of Central Banks and Finance
Secretaries of SAARC), may be obtained about the
conceptual viability and feasibility of the proposal].

iv)

Setting up of National Committees in member
countries mandated to monitor and devise

Negotiations for a South Asia Free Trade
Area (SAFTA)
The SAFTA has seen progress with six meetings held
between January and December 2004. There has been
progress on fine tuning the Sensitive Lists, and narrowing
differences on Rules of Origin. A Concept Paper on
Mechanism for Compensation to the Least Developed
Contracting States (LDCS – Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Maldives and Nepal) is to be discussed at the Maldives
meeting in March 2005. Requests made by the LDCs for
Technical Assistance would be forthcoming from India,
Pakistan and Sri Lanka. It is hoped that all issues would
be wrapped up by June 2005, enabling countries to
complete formalities for bringing SAFTA into effect by
January 2006. With SAFTA coming into force by 1
January 2006, and its full operationalisation by 2016, we
shall be able to move forward in other areas of economic
integration such as services and investment, with a view
to moving towards a Customs Union and eventually a
South Asia Economic Union by 2020. Our proposal at
the July Ministerial Meeting for the establishment of a
SAARC High Economic Council was with the idea of
promoting ideas and initiatives related to regional
economic integration in economic, trade, financial and
monetary areas. Alongside SAFTA, Trade Facilitation

129

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Agreements pertaining to Customs Cooperation and
Avoidance of Double Taxation are likely to be signed
during the Thirteenth Summit.

Proposal for an Early Warning and
Disaster Response Regime
As approved in the 6th Environment Ministers Meeting,
India has prepared and circulated through the Secretariat
a Concept Paper on “Information Sharing on Disaster
Preparedness and Mitigation”. This would be considered
by an Expert Group meeting sometime in 2005, which
would submit its recommendations to the Seventh
Meeting of the SAARC Environment Ministers in Dhaka,
November 2005. India is keen to set up a SAARC Centre
for Disaster Management in New Delhi. The Centre would
provide a mechanism for sharing information on disaster

management amongst SAARC countries and also benefit
from best practices prevailing in the region and beyond.
This Centre would be located within the National
Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM), New Delhi,
an institution of international standard, and can function
as a resource base for data and Regional Training Centre
in SAARC for Disaster Management. India would be in a
position to share IT and GIS-based information systems
for disaster management as well as space application
technologies. The Centre would benefit from the synergies
of co-location with NIDM. The proposal acquires
additional relevance and urgency in the wake of the recent
tsunami tragedy, which has seen such a large loss of life,
displacement of persons, and loss of property and
infrastructure.

130

Technical Cooperation

T

he Technical Cooperation (TC) Division of the
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) has been responsible
for administration of technical assistance under the Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme
and the Special Commonwealth Assistance for Africa Plan
(SCAAP) to developing countries in Asia, Africa, Latin
America, Eastern Europe, Central Asia, Gulf countries
and small Islands in the Pacific and Caribbean region.
The ITEC and SCAAP together cover 156 countries,
Eritrea being the newest member of ITEC partner
countries.
ITEC programme is meant to support the political
objectives of Indian diplomacy in developing countries
and share Indian know-how, technology and expertise
with theses countries. Ever since its inception in 1964,
the ITEC programme has earned goodwill for India among
the ITEC partner countries.
Budget allocation for the Technical Cooperation Division
for the year 2004-05 has been Rs.30 crores for ITEC,
Rs.5..5 crores for SCAAP and Rs.5.1 crores for Aid for
Disaster Relief.
ITEC has following contents:
Training (both Civil and Military)
Projects and Project-related assistance such as
supply of equipment, consultancy services and
feasibility studies
Deputation of Indian experts
Study visits of senior officials to India
Aid for Disaster Relief.
Civilian training is the most popular and the most
effective means of cooperation, which has been
appreciated by the recipient countries. For civilian training
under ITEC/SCAAP, all expenses like international air
travel, tuition fees, living allowance, study tours, medical
assistance in case of sickness and book allowance are borne
by the Ministry of External Affairs. The civilian training
covers Audit, Banking, Finance & Accounts, Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals, Education Planning & Administration,
English Language, Entrepreneurship, Food Technology,

11

Manpower Resource Planning, Information Technology,
Journalism & Mass Communication, Labour
Administration, Management, Parliamentary Studies,
Remote Sensing, Rural Development, Small Scale
Industry, Standardisation, Small Business Development
and Textile Technology. While ITEC/SCAAP Programmes
are basically bilateral, of late, regional groupings are also
included in the programme. Extra training slots have been
provided to ASEAN and BIMSTEC countries. For the
first time, training slots have also been earmarked for
African Union (AU). In addition to regular training
courses approved under ITEC/SCAAP, special courses
have been arranged specifically for nominees of these
regional groupings.
In the current financial year, TC Division intends to
Provide civil training to 3600 nominees of ITEC partner
countries for which 3549 applications have been received
by 18 February 2005 and 2159 persons have actually been
trained. List of the institutes offering civilian courses to
foreign nominees under ITEC/SCAAP Programme of the
Ministry of External Affairs are at Appendix-XIV.
Country-wise position about slots earmarked and utilised
under ITEC and SCAAP for the period April-February
2005 are shown at Appendix- XV. Appendix-XIII shows
the expenditure statement for the financial year 2004-05.
Defence Training: India offers training in all the three
wings of Defence Services to selected number of countries
in some of the prestigious institutions like National
Defence College (NDC), New Delhi, and Defence
Services Staff College (DSSC), Wellington in Tamil Nadu.
The training covers a number of fields, such as, Security
and Strategic Studies, Defence Management, Artillery,
Electronics, Mechanical Engineering, Marine and
Aeronautical Engineering, Anti-Marine Warfare,
Hydrography, Logistics and Management & Qualitative
Assurance Services.
The 45th NDC Course (National Defence College) in New
Delhi began in January 2005 and 22 officers from foreign
countries are participating in the course, the duration of
which is almost one year. In the 60th DSSC course, which
began in May 2004, there are 30 foreign defence

131

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

personnel. In addition, 268 slots (124 for Army Courses,
55 for Air Force Courses and 89 for Naval Courses) have
been allotted during 2004-2005. The military trainings
are offered under ITEC I, ITEC II, Self Financing Scheme
and Reciprocal schemes. In case of ITEC-I Scheme, the
entire cost of air travel, tuition fees, living allowance,
medical and study tours are borne by the Government of
India while in case of training programmes under ITECII only cost of international air travel is met by the
beneficiary countries. Rs.10 crores have been earmarked
for defence training. The slots allotted for the year 20042005 may be seen at Appendix-XVII.

Aid for Disaster Relief
Supplies of medicines, blankets and mosquito nets were
the main items of disaster relief to certain countries during
the year 2004-2005. The beneficiary countries are Belize,
Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala in Central
America (Rs.14.461 lakhs) Jamaica (Rs.90 lakhs),
Grenada (Rs.22.5 lakhs), Haiti (Rs.4.5 lakhs), Suriname
(Rs.43 lakhs) Bahamas (Rs.22.5 lakhs) and Dominican
Republic (Rs.22.5 lakhs). In addition, DPR Korea was
gifted 1,000 Metric Tonnes of rice worth Rs.1.67 crore.
Appendix XVI shows India’s aid for disaster relief during
2004-05.

Projects & Supplies
Cambodia
In line with a commitment made by the Vice-President
of India to the Prime Minister of Cambodia, an Agreement
was signed between the two Governments for the
conservation and restoration of Ta Prohm Temple
Complex at Siem Reap in Cambodia through
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). ASI had estimated
the total cost of the project as Rs.19.57 crores to be
implemented in 10 years. The Committee on Non Plan
Expenditure (CNE) had approved the first phase(200304, 2004-05) amounting to Rs.3.50 crores and also
accorded its approval in principle for the total (estimated)
cost of the project i.e. Rs.19.57 crores. The work is under
progress.
It has been decided to gift 1,000 bicycles to Cambodia for
the use of elected Commune Councilors.
Indonesia
In line with a request made during the visit to India by
the former President of Indonesia, a Vocational Training
Centre for Construction Sector has been set up in Jakarta
under ITEC at the cost of at Rs.308.70 lakh. The National
Small Industries Corporation Ltd. (NSIC) is the

implementing agency for the project. All the machinery
and equipment supplied from India have been installed
by the 1st batch of experts from NSIC. In January 2005
the 2nd batch of experts have also been deputed and they
are currently imparting training to the Indonesians. The
project is expected to be completed and handed over to
the Indonesian side shortly.
Laos
In pursuance of the discussion during the 4th India-Laos
Joint Commission on Trade, Economic, Scientific and
Technological Cooperation held in New Delhi, an expert
from NIC, Department of Information Technology was
deputed to Laos to conduct a feasibility study for setting
up of an IT Centre. Total cost involved will be Rs.9.6
crore and the project will be completed in three phases.
The first phase of setting up IT lab has been completed at
a cost of Rs.5.5 lakhs.
In pursuance of the commitment already made, audiovisual equipment worth Rs.6.54 lakhs was gifted to IndiaLao Friendship Association by the Prime Minister during
his visit to Laos in November 2004.
Yemen
In pursuance of an agreement with the Government of
Yemen, equipment worth Rs.1.9 crore is being gifted for
setting up of a vocational training centre at Taiz for the
Al-Khotwa Institute.
Zimbabwe
A commitment was made by the Government of India to
the Government of Zimbabwe for the development of
Small and Medium Scale Enterprises under G-15
Cooperation Programme and US $ 5 million was
earmarked for the project. An MoU is being finalized
following fresh feasibility study conducted by HMT (I) ,
the implementing agency for the project. The project is
expected to begin shortly.

Deputation of Experts
The services of ITEC experts has continued to be in great
demand in ITEC partner countries.. The total number of
experts deputed to various countries has reached 51 in
2004-2005. The experts deputed are in various fields such
as Architecture, Dairy Farming, Medicine, Security, Town
Planning, Remote Sensing, Agriculture, Television
Transmission, WTO Matters, etc. Details of experts
deputed in the current financial year as also of experts
who were sent earlier but whose deputation is still under
continuation, are at Appendix-XVIII.

132

Investment and Trade Promotion

T

he Investment and Trade Promotion (ITP) Division
prepared a detailed INVESTMENT AND BUSINESS
Brief to supplement and update the comprehensive
information contained in its publication “India Reliable
Business Partner – Attractive FDI Destination”. The Brief
was circulated to all Indian Missions abroad to equip them
with the latest developments in the Indian economy along
with facts and figures relating to its trade and
investments.As part of the new policy of active promotion
of foreign investment into India, the Division co-published
a four-page “India Investment Manifesto” which was
carried by Asia Money, a sister organization of the
prestigious publication Euro Money, in their special issue
of November 2004 on “Invest in India 2004”.
The Division participated actively in the meetings of
Foreign Investment Promotion Board, Reserve Bank of
India, Ministry of Civil Aviation and other policy meetings
contributing to reforms and liberalization of the economy
and investment procedures. The Division took active part
in governmental and non-governmental meetings on
energy issues. The Division has been advocating that India
should acquire petroleum and gas assets abroad for
strategic energy security. The Division interacted with
Export Promotion Councils, Trade and Industry bodies,
Commerce Ministry and the Missions for promotion of
India’s exports. The ITP Division supported the efforts of
the Ministry of Commerce in organizing inter-active
sessions between Commercial Representatives posted in
Indian Missions in East Asia with Indian business and
industry in Chennai, Bangalore, Mumbai and Delhi in
September 2004.
The Government has been using development aid,
including grants and Lines of Credit (LOCs) on
concessional terms as tools for promotion of India’s
political, economic and commercial interests. In 20042005, to date, LOCs amounting to US$ 423 million have
been approved for disbursal and an additional amount of
US$ 352 million is in the pipeline. The grants and LOCs

12

have helped Indian companies to obtain project contracts
and orders for supply of goods and services in a number of
countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The Division has been highlighting to the media and the
business community in India and abroad of the importance
being attached by the Ministry of External Affairs to
economic diplomacy to promote India’s economic and
commercial interests. As part of this, the Missions are
being encouraged to be pro-active in the promotion of
India’s economic and commercial interest.
The Division has received positive feedback about the
efficacy of its new website www.indiainbusiness.nic.in
which is devoted exclusively for the economic and
commercial aspects of India’s diplomacy. The website is
constantly updated with comprehensive and relevant
information for global investors and businessmen about
the opportunities in India.
As part of its drive to promote India as an attractive
investment destination, the ITP Division supported the
efforts of the Ministry of Commerce in organizing the
OECD sponsored Global Forum on International
Investment (GFII) and the India Investment Roundtable
which were held in New Delhi in October 2004. While
the main theme of the GFII was “Investment for
Development: Forging Partnerships”, the India
Investment Roundtable focused on opportunities and
policy challenges for investment in India.
The ITP Division hosted Mr. Donald J. Johnston, Secretary
General of the OECD who visited India on 15 October
2004 at the invitation of External Affairs Minister. During
his visit, the Secretary General called on PM and discussed
measures to strengthen relations and intensify interaction
between OECD and India in order to address the various
challenges that are faced especially by developing
countries.

133

13

Policy Planning and Research

T

he Policy Planning and Research Division serves as a
nodal point for interaction with the National Security
Council Secretariat (NSCS), formerly known as the Joint
Intelligence Committee (JIC), the University Grants
Commission (UGC) and its affiliates and the Area Study
Centres (ASC) located in various universities and
specializing in research on various regions of the world.
The Division extended financial assistance to various
academic institutions/think-tanks located in different
parts of the country for holding conferences, seminars,
preparation of research papers, exchange of scholars and
support for Track-II programmes on issues related to India’s
external relations and security. A list of seminars/
conferences/meetings/study projects organized/
undertaken by institutions/NGOs partly funded by the
Policy Planning & Research Division is given at
Appendix – XII.
As per the initiative of the Foreign Secretary, the Policy
Planning Division also undertook the revival of the
Monthly Summary for the Cabinet. This covers the broad
spectrum of India’s relations with different countries of
the world during the month.
The Research Section of the Division continued to edit
and publish the Annual Report of the Ministry. The
Report served as a compendium of India’s interaction with
the rest of the world in the political, economic and cultural

fields, including the views of the government on various
facets of international relations.
The Section also remained seized of the depiction of
India’s international boundaries in foreign publications.
Cases of incorrect depiction were taken up with the
concerned governments or the publisher through the
Indian Mission abroad for necessary corrective measures.
The Division was also responsible for scrutinizing the
depiction of India’s external boundaries in the foreign
publications imported into the country, and offered its
advice to the Ministries dealing with the matter. It
coordinated the supply of map- sheets to various
Government and semi-Government agencies for use in
their official work with the Survey of India and the
Ministry of Defence. The Research Section dealt with
requests from research scholars for access to the records
of the Ministry.

Record Management
There are about five lakh files, both classified and
unclassified, lying in the Records Management Section
of the Ministry. Record Management Section has been
sending old files for reviewing regularly to the concerned
officers/sections/divisions for taking a decision regarding
retention or otherwise of these files. 2164 files which were
no longer required have been destroyed by burning.

134

External Publicity

T

he External Publicity Division, as the interface of the
Ministry with the media, continued to project India’s
perspective on foreign policy issues. The Government’s
concerns and viewpoint on various issues were actively
articulated and widely disseminated through regular and
special press briefings, statements, backgrounders, website,
audio-visual material, brochures and pamphlets etc. The
Division strengthened public diplomacy efforts through
providing new and updated material to Indian Missions
abroad for promoting India.
Special attention was paid to articulate the foreign policy
priorities of the new Government which came into power
in May 2004. The subsequent intensive diplomatic
engagement of the new Government was evident from
the exchange of high-level visits which provided excellent
opportunities for articulating India’s stand on various
issues. Prime Minister’s visits to Bangkok for BIMSTEC
Summit, London, New York for UN General Assembly,
The Hague for India-EU Summit and Vientiane (Laos)
for India-ASEAN Summit were extensively covered in
the national and world media. The External Publicity
Division arranged interviews by several Indian and
international newspapers and magazines for Prime
Minister and External Affairs Minister. Prime Minister’s
interviews were carried by prominent world media which
included inter alia The Times, Time magazine, Wall Street
Journal, Charlie Rose Show, Financial Times,
Kommersant, Rossiiskaya Gazeta and Toronto Star.
The Composite Dialogue Process between India and
Pakistan, Indo-US relations including Next Steps in
Strategic Partnership (NSSP) and meetings of High
Technology Cooperation Group (HTCG), India’s relations
with its neighbours – Bhutan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri
Lanka and Myanmar and other major countries like Russia
and China, UNSC reform, India’s aid to Afghanistan,
India’s stand on Iraq and its support to Palestine were
among the main issues which were the focus of our
publicity efforts. India’s perspectives on terrorism,
international peace, security and disarmament and the

14

progress achieved by India in the fields of economy, S&T,
IT, biotechnology etc. were also highlighted.

Spokesperson’s Office
Press briefings, statements and releases remained the most
popular means of communication for journalists and
proved to be highly effective in ensuring well-informed
media coverage. The Division’s approach in this regard
remained both reactive and proactive with responses
provided to specific issues raised by the media and
information disseminated on issues of concern to the
Ministry. About 150 press briefings were held or briefing
points released by the Official Spokesperson during the
period April 2004 – January 2005. In addition, more than
150 press releases and statements were issued during the
same period.
External Affairs Minister, Foreign Secretary and other
senior officials of the Ministry addressed special media
briefings on important issues of concern. External Affairs
Minister held press briefings in the External Publicity
Division after assumption of charge and on the occasion
of the completion of six months of UPA Government in
office.
Media management during the hostage crisis in Iraq was
one of the crucial activities carried out during the year. It
was ensured that the media received regular updates
through the statements issued by the Ministry during the
crisis. These statements were promptly uploaded onto the
website and simultaneously sent to various news
organizations through email.
India’s relief efforts in the wake of the Tsunami disaster
were given due publicity. Besides regular briefings by
Official Spokesperson, a joint briefing by Foreign Secretary
and Chief of Integrated Service Command was also
organized. The Division also sent regular updated
information to the Indian Missions on Tsunami.

Website
The Ministry’s website www.meaindia.nic.in was updated

135

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

on a real-time basis with latest press releases, briefings,
statements, documents, reports, Question-Answers in
Parliament, interviews and relevant articles and op-ed
pieces from Indian and international media. The
electronic versions of our releases have become a popular
and cost-effective means of disseminating information to
the media. Many journalists access them directly from
the website while about 200 contacts registered in the
Division’s database are also sent emails. All issues of the
Ministry’s monthly magazine “India Perspectives” and
various other publications and audio-visual material
produced by the Division are also placed on the website.
The Division is also in the process of digitizing press
conferences and briefings for the website.
The weekly MEA Newswire covering important
developments of the week continued to target
intellectuals, opinion-makers, think-tanks and Indiawatchers across the globe. An electronic Notice Board
was created for use as a source of information on the
publicity material available with the External Publicity
Division for the Missions. Professionally written articles
on various aspects of India were also made available to
the Missions through the Notice Board.

Media facilitation
External Publicity Division continued to extend logistical
and liaison assistance and support to foreign media
delegations accompanying Head of State/Government
(HOS/G) visiting India and Indian media delegations
accompanying President, Prime Minister and VicePresident on their visits abroad. The Division actively
supported visiting media delegations and Indian media in
connection with HOS/G visits from Bhutan, Canada,
Chile, Germany, Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Russia,
Singapore, Slovakia and Sri Lanka through issue of media
advisories, organizing press conferences/interactions,
facilitating access to ceremonial areas, meetings and
providing assistance for transport and accommodation.
Similar support was extended during visits at the Foreign
Minister/Ministerial level from Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, China, Comoros, Congo,
Croatia, France, Gambia, Germany, Iran, Japan, Kuwait,
Mauritius, Mexico, Myanmar, Norway, Pakistan, Russia,
Senegal, Sri Lanka, Surinam, Thailand, USA, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela, etc.
The Division facilitated the work of media delegations
through setting up of media centres with Internet,

telephone, fax and other facilities during President’s visits
to Tanzania & South Africa, Vice-President’s visit to
South Africa and Prime Minister’s visits to Laos, Thailand,
The Netherlands, USA and UK. Similar support was
provided to media covering visits of External Affairs
Minister to Kazakhstan, Nepal, Pakistan, Republic of
Korea, Russia, Switzerland, UK, USA and Vietnam. The
Division also extended assistance to Indian journalists
based in foreign countries and those travelling abroad.

Foreign Media Representatives
The Division facilitated the functioning of approximately
310 representatives of foreign news agencies and media
organizations based in India by providing up to date and
relevant information including through regular briefings
on issues of interest as well as assistance in matters of
credential documents, visas, residence permits etc. Visa
extensions and/or accreditation facilities were extended
to about 300 foreign journalists. During the General
Elections in May 2004, which received wide and
unprecedented coverage across the world, more than 100
journalists from abroad were assisted in coverage, access
to polling stations, accreditation matters etc.

Visits by Foreign Media
External Publicity Division, in coordination with Indian
Missions abroad, continued to organize visits of foreign
journalists to India and their interaction with important
institutions and centres of excellence in India. Meetings
with senior officials, intellectuals, academicians, and
business representatives, among others were organized for
the visiting journalists. These visits have emerged as a
key element of our multi-pronged efforts to bring about a
more accurate and contemporary depiction of India in
the foreign media as the journalists obtain a unique, firsthand impression of developments in India’s foreign policy,
economy, science and technology and culture.
The Division facilitated the visits of more than 50
journalists to India between April 2004 and January 2005.
These included familiarization visits by senior journalists
and editors from Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Cambodia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Egypt, Hungary,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Nepal, Nigeria, Philippines,
Russia, Slovakia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Tanzania,
Thailand, UK, USA, etc. For the first time in several years,
a group of seven Pakistani journalists were invited for a
ten-day visit. These visits had the desired effect and led
to increase in positive portrayal/coverage of India and its
diversified achievements in reputed foreign publications.

136

External Publicity

Audio-Visual Publicity
Documentaries Completed

The Division received over 325 proposals from different
countries for production of documentary films on varied
themes depicting India’s natural and cultural heritage,
economy, social traditions etc. Of these, more than 275
were cleared on receipt. The rest were forwarded to other
concerned Ministries, States and other organizations for
further processing. It is expected that approximately 50
proposals would be dealt with during February and March
2005.

Kashmir in Indian Poetry
Rooh Punjab Di
A Self Portrait
Rebuilding the Playground - Combating Child
Labour in India
Adventure Sports India
Steps & Strides
India and ASEAN - Partners in Progress

The commissioning/acquiring and supply of
documentaries, duplication of documentaries and
despatch to Indian Missions abroad on regular basis/on
request, dubbing of documentaries in foreign languages,
presentation/lending of old documentaries and feature
films to Indian Missions and foreign governments/
organisations, dubbing and subtitling of films in foreign
languages, procurement and supply of feature films for
participation in film festivals and Indian film weeks abroad,
organizing cultural publicity and exhibitions etc are some
of the major audio-visual publicity activities undertaken
by the External Publicity Division.
The films and documentaries commissioned by the
Division are aimed at positive projection of India’s image
abroad. It is also ensured that they dovetail into India’s
foreign policy objectives. 14 documentaries were
completed (see box for details). Other documentaries viz.
“Aneka Ras” (India and Indonesia), “People of Indian
Origin in the Middle East”, “India - ASEAN Car Rally” ,
“The Environment and Sustainable Development of
India”, “Indian Heritage Sites in Aden”, “Peacekeepers”
and a 24-capsule documentary on J&K are in various
stages of production and commissioning.
A crisp 25-minute film “Democracy in Action”,
showcasing the Indian electoral process and the use of
modern technology involving Electronic Voting Machines
was produced in May 2004. This film was used extensively
by Indian Missions and was broadcast in several countries.
Special screening of documentary films “The Soul
Connection” and “India and ASEAN - Partners in
Progress” commissioned by the External Publicity Division
were organised in April and December 2004 respectively
for the diplomatic community based in New Delhi, Indian
and foreign media personnel and eminent persons from
the world of art and cinema. The External Publicity
Division supported the 6th Cinefan Festival held in New
Delhi in July 2004 and the 35th International Film Festival

IT Revolution in India
Timeless Friendship: Indo-Afghan Relations
A Bridge So Near: India -Bhutan Relations
Life Encoded: Biotechnology – The Indian
Effort
Indian Legends
An Indivisible Unity
Nectar in Stone

of India held in Goa in November–December 2004.
Indian Feature Film Festivals/Film Weeks were organised
in Argentina (Buenos Aires), Azerbaijan (Baku), Brazil
(Brasilia & Sao Paulo), Bulgaria (Sofia), Czech Republic
(Prague), France (Paris), Jamaica (Kingston), Kenya
(Nairobi), Kyrgyzstan (Bishkek), Myanmar (Yangon and
Mandalay), Peru (Lima), Philippines (Manila), Russia
(Moscow), Spain (Madrid), Taiwan (Taipei),
Turkmenistan (Ashgabat), USA (Washington, Chicago),
Uzbekistan (Tashkent), Venezuela (Caracas) and
Yugoslavia (Belgrade).
Documentaries acquired/commissioned by the Ministry
were also sent to the Missions for non-commercial telecast
on foreign TV channels. Some of these documentary films
were shown on foreign TV networks in Bahrain, Bhutan,
Kenya, Laos, Malaysia, Namibia, Romania, Tanzania, and
Vietnam due to the sustained efforts of Indian Missions.
Besides, audio-visual material in the form of Betacam
cassettes, CD-ROMs, audio and video CDs, DVD and
cassettes were also supplied to the Missions for library
and presentation purposes. The material sent was in
accordance with the requirement of Missions and was
selected carefully to represent the diversity of India.
Requests for sanction of audio-visual equipment and other

137

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

hardware like TVs, VCRs, dish antennas etc received from
missions and offices in Ministry were also processed.

Special Publications, Brochures
and Books

During the period, a photo exhibition “The Path of
Compassion” on Buddhist sites and art heritage in India
was despatched to Indian Missions in Bangkok, Beijing,
Belgrade, Berlin, Colombo, Hanoi, Manila, Moscow (5
sets), Paris, Phnom Penh, Tokyo (2 sets), Ulaanbaatar (2
sets), Washington and Yangon. Another photo exhibition
“Velha Goa” about Churches of old Goa was despatched
to Indian Missions in Berlin, Copenhagen, Dublin, Lima,
Lisbon, Moscow, Paris, Rome and San Francisco.
Transparencies available in the audio-visual library of
External Publicity Division on various subjects were also
duplicated and sent to the Missions on request.
A photo exhibition on Panchsheel organized by the
External Publicity Division in November 2004 was
inaugurated by External Affairs Minister at Vigyan Bhavan
Exhibition Hall. The exhibition was attended by both
Indian and foreign dignitaries including diplomats from
foreign Missions in New Delhi.

India Perspectives
India Perspectives continues to be the flagship magazine of
the Ministry’s publicity effort abroad. The magazine aims
at promoting India’s rich cultural heritage, as also the giant
strides the country is making in the fields of Information
Technology, space, nuclear energy, science and technology
and other related fields of human endeavour. Published
in ten international languages to reach almost all corners
of the globe, the magazine carries carefully selected articles
encompassing all facets of life in India to portray India’s
achievements in diverse fields. The magazine also lends a
helping hand in tapping India’s vast tourism potential by
carrying beautifully illustrated features on various
destinations in the country. It also seeks to articulate
India’s foreign policy concerns in a subtle manner. The
current and old issues of India Perspectives are available in
the electronic format to the readers on the Ministry’s
website. Going by the reader’s response from around the
world, the magazine is keenly awaited every month and
has created a niche for itself. As India celebrated 400 years
of the Guru Granth Sahib, the December 2004 issue of
the magazine sought to bring out the relevance and
importance of this great book that has stood the test of
time.

Brochures Published
Celebrating Democracy
India: Scripting Future Histories (in German
& Burmese)
Panchsheel
General Election 2004
Afghans First - India at Work in Afghanistan
(in German)
Bridging the Ocean: India leads relief measures
in tsunami-hit areas
India: A Dynamic Democracy

The External Publicity Division brings out special
publications on important issues and events. Besides
brochures (see box for details), special publications on
12th SAARC Summit, First BIMSTEC Summit (July
2004), PM’s visit to London and New York (September
2004) and President’s visit to the United Republic of
Tanzania & the Republic of South Africa (September
2004) were brought out between April 2004 and January
2005.
For the first time in recent years, the External Publicity
Division brought out in collaboration with India Today
Plus, a high quality coffee table book titled “India-Moods
and Memories”. 3,000 copies of the book, consisting of
articles on various facets of India by well-known
personalities are being sent to Indian Missions for
distribution.
In addition, 5,000 copies of a publication “Experiencing
India through its World Heritage Sites” (comprising a
collection of photographs by the world renowned
photographer Raghu Rai) is also under preparation.
The Division despatched several books and magazines to
Indian Missions/Posts abroad depending upon their
requirements.

138

Protocol

T

he Protocol Division remained fully engaged with the
growing number of incoming and outgoing high-level
visits, conferences, credential ceremonies, official
entertainment and other multifarious functions. Protocol

15

Division’s ability to handle a large number of visits of
foreign dignitaries contributed to India’s enhanced
international image and profile. Streamlining of protocol
norms and standards continued to be a focus of attention.

List of Foreign Ambassadors/High Commissioners who Left India during the period
1.4.2004 to 28.02.2005 on completion of assignment
Name

Date of Departure

H.E.Prof. Ashir Ataev, Ambassador of Turkmenistan

3 April 2004

H.E. Mr. Jaime Infante, Ambassador of Colombia

1 June 2004

H.E.Dr. Nuri El-Fituri Al-Madani, Ambassador of the Great Socialist People’s
Libyan Arab Jamahriya

3 June 2004

H.E.Mr. Alexander M. Kadakin, Ambassador of the Russian Federation

2 July 2004

H.E.Walter Gyger, Ambassador of Switzerland

20 July 2004

H.E.Prof. Moses Musonda, High Commissioner of The Republic of Zambia.

27 July 2004

H.E.Mr. Mohamed Louafa, Ambassador of the Kingdom of Morocco

3 August 2004

H.E. Mr. Askar O. Shakirov, Ambassador of The Republic of Kazakhstan

13 August 2004

H.E.Mr. Philip Mc Donagh, Ambassador of Ireland

18 August 2004

H.E.Mrs. Vera Barrouin Machado, Ambassador of the Federative Republic of Brazil
H.E.Dr.Saeed M.Al.Shamsi, Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates

19 September 2004
9 October 2004

H.E.Mr. Ladislav Volko, Ambassador of the Slovak Republic

15 October 2004

H.E.Mr. Julio Faesler Carlisle, Ambassador of Mexico.

31 October 2004

H.E.Mr. Mun Song Mo, Ambassador of The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

8 November 2004

H.E. Ms. Penny Wensley, High Commissioner of Australia

21 November 2004

H.E.Mr.Enrique Anchordoqui, Ambassador of Uruguay

22 November 2004

H.E.Mr. Hua Junduo, Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China

24 November 2004

H.E.Mr. Armen Baibourtian, Ambassador of The Republic of Armenia

2 December 2004

H.E.Dr.Ibrokhim Mavlonov, Ambassador of the Republic of Uzbekistan

11 January 2005

H.E.Mrs. Maite E.Nkoana Mashabane, High Commissioner of the Republic of South Africa

22 January 2005

H.E.Mr. Alejandro Garrido A., Ambassador of Panama

2 February 2005

139

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

List of Foreign Ambassadors/High Commissioners who presented their Credentials
during the period 1.4.2004 to 28.02.2005
Name

Presentation of Credentials

H.E. Mr.Mun Song Mo, Ambassador of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

7 May 2004

H.E. Mr. Amadou Bocoum, Ambassador of the Republic of Senegal

7 May 2004

H.E.Mr.Khalaf Abbas Khalaf Al-Foudari, Ambassador of the State of Kuwait

7 May 2004

H.E.Mr. Choi Jung-il Choi, Ambassador of the Republic of Korea

7 May 2004

H.E.Mr. Luke Rokovada, High Commissioner of Fiji

7 May 2004

H.E. Mr. Vuk Zugic, Ambassador of Serbia & Montenegro

7 May 2004

H.E.Mr. Antonio Armellini, Ambassador of Italy

7 May 2004

H.E. Mr. Harry Mutuma Kathurima, High Commissioner of Republic of Kenya

7 May 2004

H.E.Ms.Inga Eriksson Fogh, Ambassador of Sweden

7 May 2004

H.E.Abubakar Garba Abdullahimni, High Commissioner of the Federal Republic of Nigeria

5 August 2004

H.E.Mrs. Milena Santana Ramirez, Ambassador of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

5 August 2004

H.E.Mr.Dato’ Zulkifly@Ibrahim Abdul Rahman, High Commissioner of Malaysia

5 August 2004

H.E.Mr.Balumuene Nkuna, Ambassador of Democratic Republic of Congo

5 August 2004

H.E.Mr. Bruno Claude Frederic Ranarivelo, Non-Resident Ambassador of Madagascar.

5 August 2004

H.E. Mr. Graeme Charles Waters, High Commissioner of New Zealand

29 September 2004

H.E. Mrs.Usha Chandnee Dwarka-Canabady, High Commissioner of Republic of Mauritius

29 September 2004

H.E. Mr. S.K.Walubita, High Commissioner of The Republic of Zambia

29 September 2004

H.E. Mr. Ivan Nemeth, Ambassador of The Republic of Hungary

29 September 2004

H.E.Mr.Tchary G.Niyazov, Ambassador of Turkmenistan

29 September 2004

H.E.Mr.Kairat E.Umarov, Ambassador of Republic of Kazakhstan

29 September 2004

H.E.Mr.Gilbert Bleu-laine, Ambassador of Cote d’ Ivoire

29 September 2004

H.E.Mr. Kieran Dowling, Ambassador of Ireland

29 September 2004

H.E.Dr. Tamerlan Elmar oglu Karayev, Ambassador of the Republic of Azerbaijan

30 November 2004

H.E.Mr. Dominique Dreyer, Ambassador of Switzerland

30 November 2004

H.E.Mr. Alexander Ilascik, Ambassadpor of the Slovak Republic

30 November 2004

H.E. Mr. Pedro De Bedout Gori, Ambassador of Colombia

30 November 2004

H.E. Mr. Han Chang On, Ambassador of Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

30 November 2004

H.E. Lt. Gen (Retd) AnbareeAbdul Sattar Adam, High Commissioner of
The Republic of Maldives

30 November 2004

H.E.Mr. Jose Vicente de Sa Pimentel, Ambassador of the Federative Republic of Brazil

30 November 2004

H.E.Mr. Vyacheslav Ivanovich Trubnikov, Ambassador of the Russian Federation

18 January 2005

H.E.Mr. Ernesto Carlos Alvarez, Ambassador of the Argentine Republic

18 January 2005

140

Protocol

H.E.Mr.John McCarthy AO, High Commissioner of Australia

18 January 2005

H.E.Mr.Rogelio Granguillhome, Ambassador of Mexico

18 January 2005

H.E.Mr.Sun Yuxi, Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China.

18 January 2005

Countries which opened their resident missions in Delhi on the dates mentioned:
Republic of Tajikistan Embassy

9 October 2003

Republic of Fiji High Commission

2 January 2004

Republic of Guyana High Commission

25 October 2004

Republic of Maldives High Commission

17 November 2004

Republic of Azerbaijan Embassy

1 December 2004

Kingdom of Lesotho High Commission

January 2005

Republic of Ecuador Embassy

4 February 2005

Visits in 2004
State Visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
Dignitary

Dates

HE MR Bharrat Jagdeo, President of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana

6-13 January 2004

HH Shaikh Khalifa Bin Saman Al-Khalifa,Prime Minister of Bahrain

11-19 January 2004

HE Mr. Nambaryn Enkhbayar, Prime Minister of Mongolia

14-19 January 2004

HE Mr Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, President of Brazil

25-28 January 2004

HE Mr Ion Iliescu, President of Romania

28 January –1 February 2004

HE Mr. Goh Chok Tong, PM of Singapore

8-11 July 2004

H.E. Mr. Roh Moo-hyun, President of Republic of Korea

4-6 October 2004

H.E. Mr. Gerhard Schroder, Chancellor of Germany

6-7 October 2004

Rt. Hon. Helen Clark, PM of New Zealand

17-20 October 2004

H E Senior General Than Shwe, Chairman of Myanmar

24-29 October 2004

H.E. Mr. Ivan Gasparovic, President of the Slovak Republic

11-16 December 2004

The Honourable Dato” Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, Prime Minister of Malaysia

19-23 December 2004

Official/Working visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
Working Visit of HE Mr. Goran Persson, Prime Minister of Sweden
Official Visit of HRH Paras Bir Bikram Shah Dev, Crown Prince of Nepal

9-11 January 2004
18 January –1 February 2004

HE Mr. Amani Abeid Karume, President of Zanzibar

7-12 March 2004

HE Mr Ayatollah Hashemi Shahroudi, Head of Judiciary

9-15 March 2004

HE Mr. Mahindra Rajapaksa, Prime Minister of Sri Lanka
The Rt. Hon. Sher Bahadur Deuba, Prime Minister of Nepal
H E Mrs. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, President of Sri Lanka
HE Mr Shaukat Aziz, Prime Minister of Pakistan

17-19 July 2004
8-12 September 2004
4-7 November 2004
23-24 November 2004

141

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

HH The Aga Khan

24 November –1 December 2004

HM The King of Bhutan

24-29 November 2004

H.E. Mr. Vladimir V. Putin, President of the Russian Federation

3-5 December 2004.

HE Mr. Driss Jettou, Prime Minister of Morocco

6-9 December 2004

Official visits by Foreign Minister and equivalent level
Hon J K Cuttaree, Minister of Foreign Affairs, International Trade
and Regional Cooperation of Mauritius

6-11 January 2004

Visit of Minister and Representatives of System of Central American Integration(SICA)

1-5 February 2004

Rt Hon Jack Straw, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of
United Kingdom

5-8 February 2004

HE Mr Silvan Shalom, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Israel

9-12 February 2004

HE Mr. Dominique de Villepin, Foreign Minister of France

12-13 February 2004

HE Mr. Dimitrij Rupel, Foreign Minister of Slovenia

14-18 February 2004

India-EU Troika Ministerial Meeting (Foreign Ministers of Ireland, Netherlands and
Commissioner for External Relations of EC)

15-16 February 2004

HE Dr Edmund Stoiber, Minister President of Free State of Bavaria

16-21 February 2004

Foreign Ministers of Team-9 (Western Africa)

29 February –3 March 2004

Foreign Ministers of Brazil-South Africa (IBSA Trilateral Meeting)

4-5 March 2004

HE Mr. Colin L. Powell, Secretary of State of USA

15-17 March 2004

Hon’ Lakshman Kadirgamar, Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka

28-29 April 2004

Hon’ Lakshman Kadirgamar, Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka

29 May –2 June 2004

H.E. Lyonpo Khandu Wangchuk, Foreign Minister of Bhutan

7-10 June 2004

H.E. Dr. Surakiart Sathirathai, Foreign Minister of Thailand

8-11 June 2004

H.E. Mr. Joschka Fischer, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany

13-14 July and 19-21 July 2004

H.E. Mr. Youssouf Ouedraogo, Foreign Minister of Burkina Faso

22-25 July 2004

H.E. U Win Aung, Foreign Minister of Myanmar

23-25 July 2004

H.E. Mr. Dai Bingguo, Special Rep. from China

25-30 July 2004

H.E. Dr. Kamal Kharrazi, Foreign Minister of Iran

25-26 July 2004

H.E. Dr. Solomon Passy, Foreign Minister of Bulgaria

27-30 July 2004

H.E. Ms. Yoriko Kawaguchi, Foreign Minister of Japan

12-14 August 2004

H.E. Dr. Luis Ernesto Derbez, Foreign Minister of Mexico

12-14 August 2004

H.E. Mr. Souef Mohamed El-Amine, Foreign Minister of Comoros

22-27 August 2004

H.E. Sheikh Dr. Mohammad Sabah Al Salem Al Sabah, Foreign Minister of Kuwait

24-26 August 2004

H.E. Dr. Abdullah Adbullah, Foreign Minister of Afghanistan

31 August to 3 September 2004

H.E. Mr. Jesus Arnaldo Perez, Foreign Minister of Venezuela

1-3 September 2004

H.E. Mr. Khurshid M Kasuri, Foreign Minister of Pakistan

4-8 September 2004

H.E. Dr. Cheikh Tidiane Gadio, Foreign Minister of Senegal
142

8-12 September 2004

Protocol

H.E. Mr. Sergey V Lavrov, Foreign Minister of Russian Federation

8-10 October 2004

H.E. Mr. Tang Jiaxuan, Councillor of State Council of China

18-20 October 2004

H.E. Mr. Michel Barnier, FM of France

27-28 October 2004

H.E. Dr. Sodyq S Safaev, Foreign Minister of Uzbekistan

29-31 October 2004

H.E. Mr. M Morshed Khan, FM of Bangladesh

31 October to 2 November 2004

H.E. Jaya Krishna Cuttaree, FM of Mauritius

4-9 November 2004

H.E. Ms. Maria E Levens, FM of Surinam

15-19 November 2004

H.E. Mr. Alexander D. Zhukov, DPM of the Russian Federation

18-20 November 2004

Transit visit of Heads of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
Transit visit of H.E. Mr Ion Iliescu, President of Romani

5 January 2004

Transit visit of H.E.Mr. Goran Persson, Prime Minister of Sweden

13 January 2004

Transit visit of H.E. Mr Ion Iliescu, President of Romania

5 February 2005

Transit visit of H.E. Mr. Aleksandr Kwasneiwski, President of Poland

21 February 2004

Transit visit of H.E. Mr . Aleksandr Kwasneiwski, President of Poland

27 February 2004

Transit visit of H.E. Mr Abdul Qader Bagamal, Prime Minister of Yemen (HYDERABAD)

1 April 2004

Transit visit of President of Madagascar (Kolkata)

12 May 2004

Transit visit of H.E. Mr AJJ Jammeh, President of Gambia (Mumbai)

22 May 2004

Transit visit of H.E. Mr Museweni, President of Uganda (Kolkata)

26 May 2004

Transit visit of H.E. Mr Museweni, President of Uganda (Kolkata)

30 May 2004

Chief Stella Obasanjo, First Lady of Nigeria

1-10 December 2004

H.E. S.R. Nathan, President of Singapore

10-20 December 2004

Visits abroad of President/Vice President/Prime Minister of India
Visit of Prime Minister of India to Islamabad (for SAARC summit)
Visit of Vice President of India to South Africa

3-6 January 2004
25 April –3 May 2004

Visit of Prime Minister of India to Bangkok for First BIMST-EC Summit

29-31 July 2004

Visit of President of India to Tanzania and South Africa

11-18 September 2004

Visit of Prime Minister of India to London, New York and Geneva

19-27 September 2004

Visit of Prime Minister of India to The Netherlands (for Fifth India-EU Summit)
Visit of Prime Minister of India to Vientiane (Laos)

7-10 November 2004
28-30 November 2004

Visits in 2005
State Visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
Dignitary

Dates

H.E. Dr Ricardo Lagos, President of Chile

18-22 January 2005

H.M. King Jigme Singye Wangchuk, King of Bhutan

23-27 January 2005

H.E. Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, President of Italy

12-16 February 2005

H.E. Dr Heinz Fischer, President of Austria

16-22 February 2005
143

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Official/Working visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
The Rt Hon’ble Paul Martin, PM of Canada

17-18 January 2005

H.E. Mr Hamid Karzai, President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

23-25 February 2005

Official visits by Foreign Minister and equivalent level
H.E. Mr Sidi Morro Sanneh, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of The Gambia

11-13 January 2005

H.E. Mr Cheikh Tidiane Gadio, Foreign Minister of Senegal

21-24 January 2005

H.E. Mr Frederick Mitchell, Foreign Minister of Bahamas
H.E. Mr Ramazani Baya, Foreign Minister of Democratic Republic of Congo

26 January –1 February 2005
1-4 February 2005

Rt Hon Jack Straw, British Secretary of State

16-18 February 2005

H.E. Mr Kamal Kharrazi, Foreign Minister of Iran

20-22 February 2005

H.E. Mr Lakshman Kadirgamar, Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka

24-26 February 2005

Private/Transit visit of Heads of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
HE Mr Jules Rattankumar Ajodhia, Vice President of Suriname
( Chief Guest of Pravasi Bharat Diwas 2005)
H.E.Mr Anerood Jugnauth, President of Mauritius

4-12 January 2005
10-22 January 2005

Prime Minister of Turkey (Delhi)

6 February 2005

H.E. Ashi Sangay Choden Wangchuck, Queen of Bhutan

6-21 February 2005

Private/Transit visits of Foreign Minister and equivalent level
H.E. Mr Jan Petersan, Foreign Minister of Norway

January 2005

H.E. Mr Laurie Chan, Foreign Minister of Solomon Islands
H.E. Mr Sadiq S Sofaev, Foreign Minister of Uzbekistan
Visits abroad of President/Vice President/Prime Minister of India
Nil

144

17-20 January 2005
7-8 February 2005

Passport, Visa and Consular Services

T

he CPV Division of the Ministry of External Affairs
through the Central Passport Organisation (CPO) and
through the passport, visa and consular wings of Indian
Missions and Posts abroad provides a direct interface with
the general public in India, with the Indian Diaspora
abroad and with foreign nationals. The Ministry issues
passports and renders passport related services through
the Passport Offices in India.
Currently there are 30 Passport Offices in India. All
Passport Offices have been computerized and issue
machine-printed and machine-readable passports. Grant
orders for issue of passport are generated electronically.
All routine passport related work such as generation of
cash, index checking, writing of passports, addresses and
dispatch are computerized and records maintained
electronically. Passport applications are being scanned and
stored electronically. As part of strengthening the public
grievance mechanism, all Passport Offices have been
instructed to set up Facilitation Counters and Help Desk
to assist applicants and also to attend to grievances/
complaints promptly. A public grievances mechanism also
exists within the CPV Division under close supervision
of JS (CPV).

Passport Services
Decentralisation through Post Offices and
District Offices
As part of Decentralisation Scheme, District Passport
Cells (DPCs) have been opened at districts levels where
the office of the District Magistrate/Superintendent of
Police receives passport applications and after scrutiny
and police verification forwards them to the concerned
Passport Office for issuance of passports. Currently there
are approximately 400 DPCs in 26 states in India. Opening
of DPCs has resulted in decongestion in Passport Offices
to a large extent. In addition to expediting the police
verification process, DPCs also provide relief to the
applicants who do not have to travel long distances to
approach Passport Offices. The passport applications are

16

also received through the network of Speed Post Centres.
Currently there are approximately 215 Speed Post Centres
that accept passport applications.
Ongoing Innovations
The ‘Tatkaal’ Scheme for out-of-turn issue of passports
has enabled the system to speedily respond to demand for
issuance of passports on urgent basis. During the year 2004
(upto December 2004) a total of 206915 passports were
issued under the Tatkaal Scheme resulting in additional
revenue of Rs. 31.12 crore.
Tele-enquiry system is available in 22 Passport Offices and
touch screen enquiry kiosk has been introduced in PO
Bangalore on pilot basis.
Review of Passport Issuance System
An Inter-Ministerial Committee on ‘Review of the
Passport Issuance System’ which was set up in the Cabinet
Secretariat has made several recommendations to simplify
the passport issuance system. A large number of
recommendations have already been implemented and
the remaining recommendations are being processed in
consultation with the concerned agencies.
Infrastructure
The Government has taken up construction of buildings
to house the Passport Offices at Bangalore, Kolkata,
Lucknow, Jaipur and Bhubaneshwar. At present, Passport
Office buildings at eight places viz Mumbai, Chandigarh,
Cochin, Kozhikode, Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Patna and
Panaji are owned by Ministry of External Affairs (MEA).
Office premises in six Passport Offices are owned by
Central Government/State Government and are rented
in 16 Passport Offices. The process for purchase of land
for four Passport Offices i.e. Tiruchirapalli, Guwahati,
Jallandhar and Mumbai is also underway.
Computerisation
At present, all 30 Passport Offices have been
computerised. E-mail facility is available at all

145

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

computerised Passport Offices. Web pages have also been
created for all Passport Offices. A proposal for a
comprehensive computerised network and connectivity
with interlinking of all Passport Offices as well as creation
of a Central Processing Cell is envisaged.
Workload
During the period January-December 2004, a total number
of 3352780 passports were issued and 395598
miscellaneous services were rendered. Passport-Office wise
break-up of the figures for number of passport applications
received/passports issued/misc. services rendered and
revenue and expenditure is at Appendix IV.
Scanning of Passport Files
Lack of sufficient space for storage of old applications and
difficulties in speedy retrieval for reference or for court
related matters have been a long-standing problem. To
overcome this problem, it was decided to scan old
applications and to store the information in CDs. CNE
(Committee on Non-Plan Expenditure) approval was
obtained. Scanning of old passport application has been
completed in all Passport Offices.
Passport Officers Conference
A Passport Officers Conference was held at Cochin on
26 September 2004. Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State
for External Affairs inaugurated the Conference. He
emphasized on modernization, decentralization,
elimination of pendencies, speedy redressal of public
grievances, proper maintenance of office buildings and
zero tolerance towards corruption and negligence.

Consular Services
All Missions and Posts abroad render consular services to
Indian diaspora abroad. In cases of deaths of Indians
abroad, prompt assistance was provided by Indian Missions
and Posts for completing the formalities for early dispatch
of the mortal remains, liaison with the local and Indian
authorities and keeping the relatives of the deceased
informed. During January-November 2004, 8909 Indians
were arrested abroad. 2378 deaths of Indians abroad were
reported to the Ministry.

Visa Services
Over the years, the procedure for grant of visa by Indian
Missions and Posts has been simplified. Most Missions and
Posts grant visas either across the counter on the same

day or at the most within 48 hours.A project for
computerisation of the Visa & Passport Wings of the
Missions and Posts in the Gulf, West Europe and North
America is under implementation. First, those Missions
and Posts would be computerised where the volume of
services rendered is high. Separately, CPV Division and
NIC have been working on the computerisation of the
Visa and Passport Wings of High Commission of India,
Islamabad and London.

Consular Attestation
During the year 2004-05, 5,37,467 documents were
accorded consular attestation in CPV Division, of which
232060 were commercial documents. This service is
rendered on the same day without any charges and is
prompt and efficient.
Consular Agreements – Extradition and Mutual
Legal Assistance Agreements
In order to provide a legal and institutional framework to
combat organised crime, international terrorism and drug
trafficking, and to respond to the growing international
dimensions of financial and other crime, bilateral
agreements are being negotiated with several countries
to provide legal underpinning to this international effort.
These consular agreements include Treaties on
Extradition, Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters
and Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil and Commercial
Matters.
During the visit of the President of South Korea to India
in October 2004, two agreements, Treaties on Extradition
and Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal matters were
signed. Extradition treaty and Mutual Legal Assistance
Treaty in Criminal Matters were signed with Kuwait in
August 2004 during the visit of the Foreign Minister of
Kuwait to India. An Extradition Treaty was also signed
between the Government of India and The Sultanate of
Oman on 26 December 2004.
During the year, official delegations visited Nepal to
negotiate Treaties on Extradition and Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters. An official delegation
visited Singapore to negotiate Mutual Legal Assistance
Treaty in Criminal Matters. Official delegations from Iran,
Hong Kong, Singapore and Kazakhstan visited India to
negotiate various consular agreements. As a result, text
of visits of various foreign delegations to India, Extradition
Treaty with Oman, Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty in

146

Passport, Visa and Consular Services

Civil Matters with Kazakhstan, Mutual Legal Assistance
Treaty in Criminal Matters with Hong Kong and Mutual
Legal Assistance Treaty in Criminal Matters with
Singapore were finalized and initialled at official level.
The Ministry actively pursues requests for extradition and
legal assistance from foreign governments both for criminal
and civil/commercial offences. The requests for
extradition emanate from our obligations under the
Extradition Treaties or Extradition Arrangements entered

into with various countries. During the year 2004, 14
extradition requests from various investigation agencies
were forwarded to the Foreign Governments. During the
same period, India received 10 extradition requests from
foreign governments. The Government of India extradited
two persons. Three persons were extradited to India from
foreign countries. Government of India received 88
requests for legal assistance from foreign governments and
37 Indian requests for legal assistance in criminal matters
were forwarded to the foreign governments.

147

17

Administration and Establishment

Administration

S

hri Natwar Singh assumed charge of Minister of
External Affairs on 23 May 2004. Shri E. Ahamed and
Shri Rao Inderjit Singh also assumed charge of Ministers
of State on the 23 May 2005. Shri Shyam Saran assumed
charge of Foreign Secretary from 1 August 2004.
Effective pursuance of India’s foreign policy objectives
necessitates increase in India’s diplomatic presence
abroad. Equally important challenge for the
Administration Division during the year was to keep the
morale of its personnel high by providing adequate
promotional avenues in all grades. As part of the policy
to meet the functional requirements of the Ministry, both
at Headquarters and in Indian Missions/Posts, as also to
meet the aspirational needs of its personnel, the
Administration Division undertook the 4th Cadre Review
of IFS and also the first ever Cadre Review of IFS ‘B’. The
4th Cadre Review IFS enabled creation of 29 posts at Grade
III of IFS and also 40 posts at Junior Scale of IFS and
Probationers’ Reserve. The first ever cadre review of
IFS(B) provides for creation of 60 posts at Under Secretary
level, 94 posts at Section Officer level and 67 posts at
Private Secretary level, and also commensurate reductions
in Group ‘C’ posts. With the active support of DoP&T
and Ministry of Finance, the Ministry has been able to
get necessary approvals for both the Cadre Reviews and
also implemented them in a time-bound manner.
Ministry implemented mandatory Screening Committee
mechanism devised by DoP&T for optimization of Direct
Recruitment at all levels– which resulted in abolition of
posts. Administration Division also undertook extensive
studies of human resources deployments in the Ministry
and effected various measures to rationalize the
distribution of personnel both in the Missions/Posts abroad
as well as in various Divisions at Headquarters in the wake
of above mandatory abolition of posts. This exercise was
also aimed at streamlining the support staff available in
the Ministry by providing sufficient number of more
qualified senior staff, in the light of dwindling numbers of
lower level staff particularly at UDC/LDC level.

A total of 3340 officers and staff are employed by the
Ministry at Headquarters and in 162 Missions/posts
abroad, as detailed in the table at Appendix I. This
includes Indian Foreign Service A (IFS), Indian Foreign
Service B (IFS B), Interpreters and Legal & Treaties
(L&T) Cadres.
Recruitment made in the Ministry from 1 April to 30
November 2004 through Direct Recruitment (DR) and
through Departmental Promotions (DP) and Limited
Department Examinations (LDE) including against
reserved vacancies, are given in the table at
Appendix II.
The table at Appendix III gives details of the language
proficiency of officers of the Ministry.
Ministry continued its efforts aimed at maximizing
efficiency through simplification of rules and regulations
and adoption of new technology.

Establishment
Two new Divisions, Projects Division and e-Governance
and Information Technolog Division,were carved out of
the Establishment Division to ensure special attention to
construction projects and computerization in the Ministry.
The Establishment Division remains a service Department
responsible for renting and maintenance of all premises
of the Ministry in India, renting of premises abroad,
fixation of allowances and grants and supply of office and
residential equipment, furniture and art objects to
Missions as well as offices at Headquarters.
A system of mid-term review of the foreign allowance
effective from 1 October every year was introduced to
make the system of annual indexation introduced in 1998
more responsive to changes in the cost of living. The
Indexation Team visited South Africa, London and Rome
to examine problems related to the depreciation of the
US dollar. On the recommendation of the Team, the
ministry provided protection to the Representational
Grant in terms of local currency and to the Foreign
Allowance in certain Missions. A comprehensive review

148

Administration and Establishment

of the Representational Grant and Special Grants is under
consideration.
The floors of Akbar Bhawan, vacated by CDoT, were
renovated. The new Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs
will occupy part or it while the rest will be with the
Ministry. Work is also to start soon on the renovation of
C-I Hutments, where the Records Management Section
is located.
The Committee for selection of art objects (OdA
Committee) was reconstituted. Smt. Anita Saran, Spouse
of Foreign Secretary is the Chairman of the Committee.
Members of the OdA Committee are: Shri S. Varadrajan,
formerly Secretary (Culture), Chairman, Expert
Committee, National Museum; Shri Rajiv Lochan,
Director, National Gallery of Modern Art; Dr. Sudhakar
Shanna, Secretary, Lalit Kala Academy; Ms. Purnima Rai,
Delhi Crafts Council; Ms. Jasleen Dhamija, Textile Expert;
Ms. Lekha Bhagat, Pottery Expert; Shri Dilip Sinha, Joint
Secretary (Estt. & Projects), Ministry of External Affairs
(as Ex-Officio Secretary).

Projects Division
The Projects Division of the Ministry of External Affairs
is a service Department administering expenditure related
to Capital Outlay for purchase of built-up properties and
construction and renovation projects in India and abroad.
In addition, the Division is responsible for repair and
maintenance of the Ministry of External Affairs’ premises
abroad.
Projects
The Ministry attaches high priority to the expeditious
completion of planned construction projects in India and
abroad and is moving resolutely to achieve this goal.
Efforts to expedite construction on government owned
plots have been intensified and substantive progress was
made during 2004-05 in developing these plots and
commencing planning and construction activities in a
systematic manner.
The Ministry has successfully completed construction of
the Embassy complex in Abu Dhabi. Other projects are
in various stages of planning and implementation.
Financial approval of the competent authority has been
obtained for construction of the Chancery and staff
residences in Warsaw, redevelopment of High
Commissioner’s Residence in Singapore and construction
of the Chancery in Abuja. Pre-construction activities for
these projects, such as finalization of drawings and

obtaining local body approvals, have been initiated.
Financial approval for the projects in Brasilia, Kathmandu,
Islamabad, Tashkent, etc. is being processed. Design for
the Dhaka Embassy complex has been finalized and the
Ministry is in the process of signing an agreement with
the consultant following which cost estimates will be
drawn up.
For projects where financial approval already exists,
Ministry is taking steps for their timely execution. The
first stage building permit for the construction project in
Beijing has been obtained and second stage approvals are
being processed. The process of short-listing contractors
has also been initiated. Fresh tenders are being floated
for the Muscat construction project where the tendered
cost turned out to be above the approved cost. The
residential construction project in Moscow, which had
reached an advanced stage of planning, has been stalled
in view of the withdrawal of the plot by the local
authorities and efforts are on to reach a mutually
acceptable solution. Renovation of the PR’s Residence in
Geneva is underway and construction of residences at 8
SAS London has been initiated. Construction of a
Cultural Centre in Tokyo and renovation of other
properties of the Mission in Tokyo are at planning stage.
New plots for construction of Chancery were acquired in
Mauritius and Bahrain. A plot offered by the Mauritian
government in the upcoming Cyber City for construction
of our Chancery, in lieu of the earlier plot, was accepted
during December. In Bahrain, a plot in the new diplomatic
enclave was purchased based on a decision of a Property
Team that visited Bahrain in January 2005. The Qatar
authorities have informed that a plot will be allotted to
us in the new diplomatic enclave in Doha by mid 2005.
In India, construction of the Foreign Service Institute
complex, including the hostel and administrative block
and residences, is at an advanced stage of execution. An
additional strip of land has been acquired for the FSI
complex and local body approvals are being sought for
the plans. The headquarters of the Asian-Afro Legal
Consultative Organisation, being constructed in
Chanakyapuri as a gift from the Government of India, is
nearing completion. Construction of the ICCR building
in Kolkata and Regional Passport Office building in
Lucknow is also in progress. Construction of the RPO
building in Chandigarh has been completed. Construction
of a housing complex for the Ministry of External Affairs
officers in Pappankala, Dwarka has also been completed
and allotment of flats has already started.

149

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

Financial sanction for the construction of the Ministry of
External Affairs Officers’ Housing Complex in
Chanakyapuri has been obtained and CPWD has been
asked to implement the project within a stipulated time
frame. CPWD is in the process of obtaining local body
approvals.
The Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan project has been entrusted
to the CPWD for design and execution. Formerly known
as Videsh Bhavan, the Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan will serve
as the headquarters of the Ministry of External Affairs,
and will be located at the junction of Janpath and Maulana
Azad Road. An in-house concept design has been
prepared by CPWD which is in architectural harmony
with the creation of Lutyens and other buildings on the
Central Vista and is in consonance with the environment
and surroundings. As the building would house the
Foreign Ministry, which is frequently visited by foreign
dignitaries, due care has been taken to ensure that the
building not only meets the Ministry’s functional
requirements, but also has a notable presence,
representative of India’s stature in the international
community.
The concept design of the Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan has
been approved in principle by the Delhi Urban Arts
Commission while approval of the Central Vista
Committee and other local bodies is being processed.
Simultaneously, financial approval of the project is also
being sought. The Committee for Non-Plan Expenditure
has approved the project at a cost of Rs. 175.57 crores,
based on CPWD estimates. Necessary steps are being
taken to obtain Cabinet approval. CPWD has indicated
that construction of the building will take forty months
after receipt of all approvals. The Ministry attaches a high
priority to the project and it would be the effort of the
Ministry to ensure that the project is completed on
schedule once the necessary approvals are obtained.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Standing
Committee of Parliament on External Affairs, progress of
construction projects is being closely monitored and
evaluated on a regular basis. Status of the projects is
regularly reviewed with a view to ensuring proper follow
up and timely implementation.

Purchase of Property Abroad
Ministry has been making efforts to cut down on
government expenditure on rentals through purchase of
built up property abroad. High rental stations have been
identified and Missions in these stations have been asked
to locate suitable properties for purchase. Increase in the
Ministry’s delegated financial powers for expenditure on
purchase/ construction projects from Rs. 5 crores to Rs
15 crores has given greater leeway to Missions to explore
possibilities of purchase. It has been the endeavour of the
Ministry to process proposals received in an expeditious
manner. Property for Ambassador’s Residence was
purchased in Panama in March 2004. A Property Team
visited Buenos Aires and Georgetown in January 2005
and recommended purchase of Chancery and Embassy
Residence in both the stations. Various formalities
associated with purchase are being processed with a view
to concluding these purchases within the current financial
year. Proposals for purchase of property in various other
stations are under active consideration of the Ministry.

e-Governance & Information Technology
A new Division, called e-Governance & Information
Technology, was created to reflect the increased
importance attached to the e-Governance initiatives in
Ministry of External Affairs, in addition to the ongoing
hardware supply aspect.
A major project on a worldwide scale was initiated and
completed during this period, namely, Project
Standardised Email Addresses and Management. Through
the implementation of this project, all Ministry of External
Affairs email users have been brought under a single
domain of user@mea.gov.in. Every Mission/Post has also
been given the standard email IDs under the scheme.
Moreover, all officers have been given Name Based
Permanent Email IDs that can be used based on anywhereanytime basis.
Apart from this, various other projects like Mission
Passport and Visa package, Diplomatic ID card
digitization, Parliamentary Assurances Monitoring
Systems have been completed. Ministry of External
Affairs’s website has been standardized under
www.mea.gov.in domain name.

150

Coordination

T

he Coordination Division consists of three Wings:
Parliament Section, Coordination Section and Students
Cell.

Parliament Section
Coordination Division is the nodal point of the Ministry
of External Affairs for all work relating to Parliament
including Questions-Answers, Assurances, debates on
foreign relations and laying of reports on the Table of both
Houses of Parliament. The Coordination Division also
organizes the meetings of the Consultative Committee
on External Affairs, and coordinate and look after work
relating to Parliamentary Standing Committee on External
Affairs and other Parliamentary Committees with regard
to matters handled by the Ministry of External Affairs.

Coordination Section
Coordination Section processes requests for grant of no
objection from political angle to the visits by Governors,
Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Deputy Chairperson of Rajya
Sabha, Union Ministers, Ministers in the State
Governments, MPs, MLAs, members of the Judiciary,
Government officials etc. Political clearance is normally
accorded by the Ministry of External Affairs after taking
into consideration several factors. These include
guidelines laid down by the Government of India for this
purpose; the political and functional justification for the
visit; the background and antecedents of the organizers;
and the recommendation from our Mission/Post
concerned. The recommendations of this Ministry are an
essential input before a Government official is permitted
to proceed abroad.
During the year, Coordination Section also processed a
large number of approvals for participation of various
Indian sportsmen and sports teams in international events
abroad and foreign sports teams in India.
During the year, Anti-Terrorism Day (21 st May),
Sadbhavana Diwas (20th August) and Quami Ekta Week/
Diwas (19-25 November) were observed with due
solemnity. Pledges were administered, both at
Headquarters and in our Missions abroad.

18

Requests for grant of no objection for holding
international conferences, seminars, workshop,
acceptance of foreign aid/grants, approvals under the
Foreign Contribution Regulation Act, grant of Amateur
W/T Licence under the Indian Telegraph Act 1885, grant
in aid to Indo-foreign cultural friendship and cultural
societies located in foreign countries, were also processed
during the year in an expeditious manner. Similarly,
diplomatic clearance for non-scheduled flights, visits by
foreign naval ships and vessels were processed.

Students Cell
Students Cell, a part of the Coordination Division, deals
with the selection, nomination and admission of foreign
self-financing students against reserved seats in MBBS/
BDS, Engineering Degree, B. Pharmacy and Engineering
Diploma courses in Medical and Engineering institutions.
It also deals with political clearance in respect of foreign
students seeking admission to Graduate and Post Graduate
courses in Engineering, Medicine, Management and other
technical and professional courses including Elective
training in various medical institutions and research
courses.
It liaises with the various government Ministries/
Departments and institutions in connection with the issue
of political clearance and admission of self-financing
foreign students to various technical and professional
courses.
149 valid applications for admission to MBBS/BDS were
received in the academic year 2003-2004, and 164 in the
year 2004-2005. Similarly 122 and 126 applications were
received during the years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005
respectively for admission to reserved seats for Degree/
Diploma in Engineering and Pharmacy.
During the years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005, in addition
to processing of applications for admissions against
reserved seats, 1123 and 1236 applications respectively
were processed for grant of no objection from political
angle.

151

19

Non Resident Indians and
People of Indian Origin Overseas

A

fter creation of the new Ministry of Overseas Indian
Affairs, most of the subjects which were being handled by
this Division have been transferred to the new Ministry.
Since the NRI/PIO Division is still a part of the Ministry
of External Affairs, some of the subjects handled by the
Division during the period under review are given below:

Third Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 2005
The 3rd Pravasi Bharatiya Divas was organized in Mumbai
from 7-9 January 2005. NRI/PIO Division gave full
secretariat backup to the newly formed Ministry of
Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) in organizing the event.
The Prime Minister inaugurated the event and Pravasi
Bharatiya Samman Awards were conferred by the
President on 15 prominent NRIs/PIOs. It gave an
opportunity to the Government to feel the pulse of the
Indian diaspora vis- a -vis their expectations and to evolve
a broad framework of policy to engage the diaspora for
mutual benefit.
Inaugurating the 3-day event, Prime Minister announced
the extension of dual citizenship to overseas Indians in

all countries who migrated from India after 26 January
1950. Following PM’s announcement, Ministry of Home
Affairs (MHA) is taking action in simplifying the
application form and format of citizenship certificate and
issue of OIC visa. The Indian Citizenship Act and
Supplementary Rules are accordingly being amended and
this will be notified to all concerned.
Grievances Received from NRIs / PIOs
During the period in question, the Division received a
large number of complaints from NRIs / PIOs regarding
illegal occupation and violation of their property in India.
These grievances were referred to the concerned state
Governments for amicable settlement. Complaints were
also received regarding failed and fraudulent marriages of
Indian girls with NRI/PIO grooms. Since the problem was
assuming serious proportions, State Governments were
sensitized to create a separate Cell to handle such
problems, including counseling and legal options, in line
with recommendations of the National Commission for
Women whose report highlighted the plight such women
seeking urgent redressal.

152

Foreign Service Institute

T

he Foreign Service Institute continued its endeavor
to train foreign diplomats apart from training IFS
Probationers and other Ministry of External Affairs
officials. Three Professional Courses for Foreign Diplomats
(PCFD) and two Advanced Courses on Asia for Foreign
Diplomats (ACAFD) and a Special Course for Palestinian
Diplomats (SCPD), were conducted by the Institute
during the year. A Special Course for Canadian Diplomats
is to be conducted from 21 – 24 March 2005.The Virtual
Campus of FSI, set up in consultation with Indira Gandhi
National Open University (IGNOU) to impart MidCareer Training to serving Indian diplomats, was
inaugurated by the External Affairs Minister on 27 July
2004. The Institute also conducted a two-week residential
mid-career Module on Foreign Policy, Security, Economic
and Regional Issues for serving Indian diplomats who have
completed 18-20 years of service. MoU for Cooperation
with Foreign Service Institutes of Bulgaria, Venezuela,
Afghanistan and Namibia were signed during the year.
The Foreign Service Institute (FSI) continued its
endeavour not only in training Indian and foreign
diplomats during the year 2004-2005 but also maintained
institutional linkages with its counterparts in other
countries. A brief detail of the Institute’s working during
the year is given below:

Training of Indian Diplomats
Launching of Virtual Campus for Mid Career
Training
Foreign Service Institute (FSI) established in 1986 was
originally tasked with the mid-career training for our
officers. In pursuance of this objective competent
authorities approved an Internet based training
programme for mid-career officers. The proposal for
Internet based training programme was made in view of
the fact that our officers are scattered at different posts
and jobs across the world in different time zones and the
movement of officers on transfer either to headquarters
or to another mission, at different times, make them
unavailable for headquarter-based training in significant
number at any given moment.

20

The mid-career training shall focus on the following
Groups of officers:
Target Group 1 (TG-1): officers with service of
11- 13 years
Target Group 2 (TG-2): officers with service of
18-20 years
The training course started in July 2004 with 1992 batch
officers in TG- 1 and 1985 batch officers in TG-2. The
online training focused on foreign policy, security,
economic and regional issues for both the groups. For the
TG- 2 officers, FSI organized a two-week residential
module from 3-14 January 2005 in New Delhi. The aim
of the residential module is to supplement the online
learning with interaction with important decision-makers.
As part of the two–week module the TG-2 participants
also attended a three day module on “Strategic
Management and Leadership” at Indian Institute of
Management, Bangalore.

Training of Indian Foreign Service Officers
One year training programme for the nine Indian Foreign
Service Officer Trainees of 2003 batch was successfully
completed on 7 January 2005. A variety of subjects were
covered in the programme through lectures, interactive
seminars as well as visits to various institutions. As in the
previous year the curriculum for training included Foreign
and Security policy; economic policy; International Law
and legal issues; Press, culture and information; consular
affairs; functional skills etc. In order to provide the
participants with a deeper understanding of these subjects,
to enhance their knowledge of immediate neighbourhood
and to familiarize them with the work of Indian Missions
abroad, the programme also included three study visits to
countries in the SAARC region. FSI commenced the oneyear training programme for sixteen- member Indian
Foreign Officers of 2004 batch on 10 January 2005.

Training programme
journalists

for

Indian

FSI started an annual course for Indian correspondents

153

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

on “Diplomacy and Indian Foreign Policy”. The first
programme was held from 31 January – 4 February 2005,
which was inaugurated by External Affairs Minister Shri
K. Natwar Singh. 24 journalists participated in the Course.

Training programme for Indian
Administrative Service Probationers
FSI conducted a one-day Workshop on India’s Foreign
Policy for 92 probationers of 2004 batch of Indian
Administrative Service on 18 February 2005.

Training of Foreign Diplomats
35th and 36th Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats
(PCFD) were organised from 8 March to 16 April 2004
and from 23 August to 1 October 2004 respectively. 2nd
and 3rd Advanced Course on Asia for Foreign
Diplomats (ACAFD), a course for mid-career/senior level
foreign diplomats, were held from 26 April to 7 May 2004
and from 18 to 29 October 2004 respectively. The Special
Course for Palestinian Diplomats was conducted
successfully from 22 November to 17 December 2004.
Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs,
graced the Valedictory Function as Chief Guest and
presented the certificates to the trainee diplomats. The
new Dean of the Foreign Service Institute Shri Atish Sinha
also attended the Valedictory Function.
A Special Course for Canadian Diplomats is to be
conducted from 21 - 24 March 2005 in New Delhi. The
37th Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats is being
held from 14 February to 24 March 2005. Diplomats from
33 countries are attending the 37th PCFD.

Institutional Linkages
Former Dean of Foreign Service Institute, Shri Santosh
Kumar, visited Vienna from 23 to 26 June 2004 to attend
the 32nd Annual Meeting of Deans and Directors of
Diplomatic Academics and Foreign Relation Institutes
hosted by Diplomatic Academy of Vienna. He was a
Panelist for Panel Discussion on “Challenges for
Diplomacy in 21st Century.” Memorandums of
Understanding for cooperation between FSI and Foreign
Service Institutes of Bulgaria, Venezuela, Afghanistan and
Namibia were signed during the year.
During the year FSI was visited by the following
dignitaries/delegations to discuss facilitation of mutual cooperation and bilateral relationship:
(i)

Ms. Katherine Peterson, Dean, United States
Foreign Service Institute, Washington D.C.;

(ii) A two member delegation from the Foreign Service
Institute of Canada;
(iii) A three member delegation from Myanmar led by
Mr. U. Tint Deir, Director General, Training,
Research and Foreign Languages Department,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Government of
Myanmar;
(iv) A 29 member delegation of the Singapore Senior
Management Programme which included senior
public servants of the Government of Republic of
Singapore; and
(v)

154

A delegation of nine trainee officers from Foreign
Service Academy of People’s Republic of Bangladesh
led by the Vice- Principal of the Academy.

Implementation of
Official Language Policy and
Propagation of Hindi Abroad

T

he Ministry of External Affairs is making all efforts
for the promotion and propagation of Hindi in its offices
as well as in Missions/Posts abroad. Besides implementing
the Official Language Policy of the Government of India,
it plays an important role in the promotion and
propagation of Hindi abroad. Documents like Bilateral
Treaties, Agreements, Memoranda of Understanding,
Credentials, Speeches of President, PAC paragraphs,
Annual Report of the Ministry and Parliament Questions
submitted to both the Houses of Parliament are issued
bilingually.
The Ministry has a well-formulated scheme of propagation
of Hindi abroad. The Indian Council for Cultural
Relations (ICCR) deputes visiting Hindi Professors to
various foreign universities. Indian Missions/Posts abroad
promote and assist in the learning of Hindi through
correspondence courses conducted by Central Hindi
Directorate. In 2004-05, out of 100 slots there were 43
students admitted from 18 countries to learn Hindi at
the Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra. Hindi teachers were
appointed in many Indian Missions/Posts abroad under a
special scheme to teach Hindi to the children of Mission
personnel and other officials of organizations like Airlines,
Banks etc.
Hindi teaching material and related children literature
on various subjects, such as, Indian Culture, Art,
literature, History and Philosophy were sent to Indian
Missions/Posts for their libraries and also for donating to
educational institutions and various voluntary
organizations engaged in promotion of Hindi. Fifteen
prominent Hindi magazines are also being sent to
Missions/Posts abroad. Teaching material, including
textbooks, dictionaries, audio-visual cassettes, computer
software, CD-ROMs etc. were also sent on a regular basis.
Computer was gifted to some of the Missions.
The Missions/Posts maintain close contact with local

21

organizations and people of the Indian community, and
fulfill their Hindi language related requirements. Some
Indian Missions/Posts organized Hindi conferences,
literary events, Hindi essay competitions etc. to promote
Hindi. Some Indian Missions such as London, Yerevan
and Kathmandu publish Hindi magazines. Financial
assistance is given to organizations engaged in teaching
and promotion of Hindi as well as Indian culture abroad.
Embassy of India in Budapest was granted Rs.1.75 lakh
for continuing Hindi classes for higher learning. Different
Missions were given grant for conducting various
programmes for Hindi on Hindi Divas. Indian Mission in
London published “Bharat Bhavan” with the financial help
of the Ministry.
A Regional Hindi Conference was organized on 1-3 July
2004 in Bucharest (Romania) for propagation of Hindi
abroad. 14 scholars were invited from 7 nations for this
conference. Ministry of External Affairs was also
represented in this Conference. It was widely appreciated
by the scholars of these countries.
India Mission in Nepal initiated 6 scholarships for
Intermediate and 1 scholarship for BA level student. This
will give a good gesture to the neighbouring country for
Hindi.
A high-level committee, under the Chairmanship of
Minister of State, was set up in Ministry of External Affairs
on introduction of Hindi as a Language in UN.
Consequent upon organising some constructive meetings
in this regard, information from all concerned was called
for and the procedure of preparing an Advocacy Paper is
on the way. To achieve the goal, integrating people of
Indian Origin in selected countries and use of the
communication media are proposed. Sufficient assistance
from External Publicity Division is being taken and the
articles on this subject are invited, which are considered
to be circulated worldwide.

155

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

A Hindi Fortnight was organised in the Ministry in
September 2004. Various competitive programmes like
Hindi noting/drafting, Hindi essay writing, Hindi
stenography, Hindi typing and Hindi song/poetry recital
competitions were held in which a large number of officials
of Ministry of External Affairs participated. Hindi day was
observed in several Missions/Posts abroad for which
substantive grants were given by the Ministry from the
Hindi budget.
Hindi forms an integral part of the Foreign Service
Institute (FSI) training programmes. Intensive training

on Government’s Official Language policy and its
implementation (Rules and Regulations) was given to the
fresh trainees in their departmental training programme.
Meeting of the Official Language Implementation
Committee was held on 28 January 2004. The Committee
of Parliament on Official Language inspected Passport
Office, Bhopal on 14 August 2004 and Passport Office,
Chennai on 27 October 2004.
In a number of countries, a panel of interpreters has been
identified and is available with the Mission when high
level dignitaries visit respective countries.

156

Gender Issues

T

he Ministry is committed to ensuring gender equality
among all its personnel. Equal opportunities are provided
to women officers to take up challenging positions and
assignments, and currently 15 women officers are posted
abroad as Heads of Missions/Posts/Permanent
Representatives/Consul Generals. There are 5 women
officers at Secretary Level at present in addition to 7 at
Additional Secretary level, 24 at Joint Secretary Level
and 17 at Director Level. Women officers have also held
important positions representing India in prominent
international organizations such as United Nations and
its related organizations like UNESCO.

22

The present distribution of women officers among the
various cadres in the Ministry of External Affairs is at
Appendix XIX.
There is a Women’s Cell in the Ministry to address
complaints of sexual harassment of women officers at the
work place and to coordinate and interact with
institutions/bodies such as National Commission for
Women. It is headed by an Additional Secretary level
officer.

157

23

Cultural Relations

T

he Indian Council for Cultural Relations (hereinafter
referred to as the Council or ICCR) is an autonomous
body that was set up in 1950, with the primary objective
of establishing, reviving and strengthening cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries. The major activities of the Council
include:

neighbourhood. Approximately 1200 new scholarships
were offered by the Council during 2004-05 to students
under various Schemes. The percentage of utilization of
scholarship slots has been approximately 60 per cent this
year. The total number of overseas students studying in
India under various schemes is about 1500 representing
over 75 countries.

(i)

Under its mandate to look after the general welfare of
foreign students, the Council organized students’ camps
to familiarize the students with multifarious aspects of
Indian life and heritage. During the period, one summer
camp each to Sikkim/Darjeeling, Shimla/Kullu/Manali and
Nainital/Ranikhet/Almora were organized. The
representation of about 45 foreign students was there in
each camp. To promote fraternity among international
scholars studying under various scholarship programmes
of the Council and to enhance their appreciation of Indian
cultural heritage, the Council organized 5 winter camps
in the country in December. Around 250 international
students participated in these camps.

Administration of scholarship schemes for overseas
students on behalf of the Government of India;

(ii) Exchange of exhibitions;
(iii) Organization of and participation in seminars and
symposia;
(iv) Exchange of performing arts groups;
(v)

Establishing and maintaining Chairs and
Professorships for Indian Studies abroad;

(vi) Presentation of books and musical instruments;
(vii) Annual organization of the Maulana Azad Memorial
Lectures and Maulana Azad Essay Competition and
other programmes on behalf of Ministry of External
Affairs (MEA);
(viii) Providing the secretariat for the Jawaharlal Nehru
Award for International Understanding;
(ix) Publications;
(x)

Maintaining Indian Cultural Centres abroad and
supporting special bilateral programmes.

Scholarships and Welfare of International
Students
One of the major activities of the ICCR is implementation
of scholarship programmes for overseas students. The
Council administers various schemes for studies in undergraduate, post-graduate and doctoral programmes as well
as for pursuing professional courses such as engineering,
pharmacy, accountancy, business administration and
management. The thrust of the scholarship programme
is towards developing nations with special focus on the

The International Students Wing of the Council organized
an Orientation Programme for the Indian Foreign Service
Probationers to give them an overview of Indian art and
culture. The Annual International Students Festival
commemorating the Birth Anniversary of Council’s
Founder President, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad was held
on 7 December 2004 at Kamani Auditorium, New Delhi.
Students from 21 countries presented various cultural
items of their region. The Council also invited applications
for the next academic session for approximately 1050
scholarship slots.
The Council’s proposal to issue ATM cards to foreign
students studying in Delhi to withdraw their scholarship
dues has received a good response. The Council is now
considering extending this facility to ICCR scholars
studying in Bangalore and Hyderabad.

158

Cultural Relations

Indian Cultural Centres and Chairs
Abroad
In order to promote awareness and appreciation of India’s
composite cultural heritage abroad, the Council is
maintaining Cultural Centres in Cairo (Egypt), Berlin
(Germany), Port Louis (Mauritius), Paramaribo
(Suriname), Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta (Indonesia)
with a sub-Centre in Bali, Moscow (Russian Federation),
London (UK), Almaty (Kazakhstan), Tashkent
(Uzbekistan), Durban and Johannesburg (South Africa),
Port of Spain (Trinidad and Tobago), Colombo (Sri
Lanka), Dushanbe (Tajikstan), Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia)
and Suva (Fiji) with a sub-Centre in Lautoko. The Council
is also funding Music and Dance Academy at Dhaka
(Bangladesh).
As part of its ongoing process to fill the vacant posts the
Council has deputed dance/yoga teachers to ICCs
Paramaribo, Jakarta and Bali and Hindi Professors to man
the Chairs at the University of Romania and Silpakorn
Univeristy, Bangkok.
The activities of the Cultural Centres reflect the cultural
needs of the local population. The Centres organize talks,
lectures, exhibitions of visual arts, essay competitions,
performances of dance and music, staging of plays,
screening of Indian films, publication of news bulletins,
seminars on current issues etc. Regular teaching classes
of Indian music, dance, tabla, yoga and Hindi are
conducted at some of these Centres. The Centres also
maintains Libraries, Reading Rooms and Audio-Video
Libraries for the visitors. Apart from organizing their own
activities, these Cultural Centres also provide a supportive
role to the respective Indian Missions for coordinating
various cultural activities. The Centres develop and
maintain contacts with the local citizens particularly
students, teachers, academicians, opinion-makers and
cultural personalities to project holistic picture of India’s
rich and diverse cultural heritage.

Visiting Professors and Chairs of Indian
Studies Abroad
The Council is maintaining Chairs of Indian Studies
abroad to teach Indian languages and other related
subjects under the Bilateral Cultural Exchange
Programmes, Scheme of Propagation of Hindi abroad and
Council’s own programme. Presently 19 professors are
teaching Hindi, Sanskrit, Tamil, Modern Indian History,
Indian Civilization in Paramaribo (Suriname), Budapest

(Hungary), Moscow (Russia), Seoul (South Korea),
Warsaw (Poland- 2 posts of Hindi and Tamil), Port of Spain
(Trinidad & Tobago- 2 posts of Hindi and Modern Indian
History/South Asian Affairs), Ankara (Turkey), Sofia
(Bulgaria), Bucharest (Romania), Beijing (China), Madrid
(Spain), Bangkok (Thailand), Paris (France), Osh
(Kyrghystan), Tashkent (Uzbekistan), Brussels (Belgium)
and Moka (Mauritius). The Council sent a Visiting
Professor on Modern Indian Studies to Poland. The
Council is planning to depute Visiting Professor/Teacher
of Sanskrit, Hindi and Yoga at Silpakorn University,
Bangkok; Warsaw University, Poland and our cultural
center in Jakarta respectively in the month of February
2005. The Council has also been providing assistance to
institutions/centers overseas imparting courses in Indology
and Indian Studies.

Publications
Under its Publication programme the Council regularly
brings out six journals in 5 different languages. These are
‘Gagananchal’ (Hindi), ‘Africa Quarterly’ and ‘Indian
Horizons’ (English), ‘Thaqafat-ul-Hind’ (Arabic), ‘Papeles
de la India’ (Spanish), and ‘Rencontre Avec L’Inde’
(French). The Council has proposal to publish seminar
proceedings of “At Home in the World – International
Festival of Indian Literature”, Indo-Iran Seminar, and a
book on Situation of Arabic Language in Indian
Universities. Publication of a Coffee-Table book on
Maulana Azad is already in process.
During the period, the Council brought out the Arabic
edition of its publication “Contemporary Relevance of
Sufism”. The Council participated in the 10th Delhi Book
Fair during 21-29 August 2004 organized by the National
Book Trust of India at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi. The
Council also participated in a book exhibition at Karnal,
Haryana on the occasion of the Gandhi Jayanti. The latest
edition of ICCR’s prominent journal “Indian Horizons”
has been brought out in an entirely new format and style.
ICCR Publication “Vision of India” edited by Dr. Karan
Singh was released by Dr. Najma Heptulla, President,
ICCR on 24 January 2005 at Convention Hall, Hotel
Ashok, New Delhi.

Presentations
During the period, the Council sent books, art objects,
audio-visual materials, musical instruments etc. on Indian
culture, art, architecture, history, dance and music to 29

159

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

countries, namely, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Belgrade, Belarus, Canada, China, Chile, Cambodia,
Indonesia, Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, London (U.K.),
Mongolia, Mauritius, Malaysia, Nigeria, New Zealand,
Portugal, Poland, Panama, U.S.A., Trinidad & Tabogo,
Uzbekistan, Thailand, Zambia, Maldives, Seychelles,
South Africa, Slovak Republic, Tajikistan, and Tashkent
through Indian Missions abroad for presentation to VVIP’s
and local dignitaries, libraries, institutions and schools.

Library
The ICCR, established in 1950, has a collection of 50,000
volumes mainly on Indian history, art and culture. It also
subscribes various newspapers and journals. The main
attraction of the library is a collection of 195 rare
manuscripts in Urdu, Arabic and Persian languages. The
manuscripts and other rare books along with the microfilm
rolls are housed in a special section of the library called
‘Gosha-e-Azad’. The Library is a boon for researchers in
Indology. The Library is a member of DELNET
(Developing Library Network). The Library renewed
subscription of 32 Indian and foreign journals for the year
2005-06.
ICCR Library primarily serves as a reference library and
provides consultation and inter-library loan services to
scholars and the organizations/institutions. Interested
research scholars, members of the public are permitted to
use the library on the basis of letter of recommendations
from the heads of the departments of the universities/
institutions or on the basis of membership of other
organized libraries. During the period April-November
2004, approximately 2000 visitors have consulted the
resources of the Library.
The Library has digitized 125 manuscripts, rare books,
speeches by Maulana Azad, Maulana Azad Lecture series,
catalogue of manuscripts, available in Urdu, Arabic,
Persian, Hindi & English language for preservation and
dissemination purpose.The Council’s Library has awarded
six short term library fellowships on India’s Cultural
Diplomacy and Maulana Azad’s vision on science,
technology and development in Hindi and English
language.The Council has started redesigning the website
of its own.

Audio-Visual Recording
In order to preserve the archives of the Council, 331 CDs
of empanelled artistes have been digitized.

Exhibitions
During the period, the Council commissioned two busts
of Mahatma Gandhi and one bust of Rajiv Gandhi for
permanent installation in Buenos Aires, Paris and Port
Louis respectively.
The Council also sent six major exhibitions namely, (i)
Photographic Exhibition “My Land My People” to
Seychelles, Zimbabwe and Namibia and Paramaribo
(ii) Exhibition entitled “Celebrating Women-Amrita
Shergil Revisited” to Uzbekistan, Kyrghyzstan, Kazakhstan
during the Festival of India, Mongolia & Moscow (iii)
Exhibition of “Madhubani Paintings” to Port of Spain for
permanent display, (iv) Exhibition of “Murals of India” to
the Nehru Centre, London for permanent display, (v)
“Indian Dolls & Dresses” to Belgrade, (vi) Exhibition of
Contemporary Graphic prints to Poland and 12 paintings
on calender for permanent display in the Nehru Centre,
London.
There is a proposal to organize Hungarian stamps
exhibition in New Delhi in February 2005.
The Council sent a statue of Mother Teresa to Chicago
in December 2004. The Council has plans to send busts
of Mahatma Gandhi to Chile, Smt. Indira Gandhi to South
Africa and of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose to Myanmar.
Besides these, the Council organized two incoming
exhibitions in New Delhi, one from Slovak Republic
“Posters & Symbols” by Thomas Pisecky and Michal
Pisecky from 9-18 September 2004 and second, an
exhibition of Painting and Craft Fair from Kyrghyzstan
from 11–16 October 2004. The Council undertook the
printing of a Special Cover, Commemorative Stamp and
Cachet on the occasion of 50th Anniversary of Panchsheel
and made arrangements for transportation of a Padmasana
from Bali to Rishikesh.

Incoming & Outgoing Distinguished
Visitors Programme
As part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries, the Council facilitates exchanges of
scholars, intellectuals, academicians and artistes under
the Distinguished Visitors Programme. During the period,
the Council hosted 18 visitors/delegations from different
parts of the world. The Council hosted the visit of Dr.
Saleh Ibrahim El Mabrouk, Director, Libyan Academy of

160

Cultural Relations

Graduate Studies, Mr. Uxi Mufti, Vice-President of the
World Crafts Council from Pakistan. Visit by 53
Distinguished Indians from diverse fields were sponsored
for interaction with their counterparts, to participate in
international seminars, conferences, workshops or to
lecture on different subjects.
The Council sponsored the visit of Dr. Suryakanta
Maharana, Lecturer, Birla Institute of Science &
Technology, Pilani to Malaysia and Prof. Sachchidanand
Sahai, Eminent Art Historian on South East Asia to
Cambodia and neighbouring countries. At the request of
Indian Mission, the Council is sponsoring visit of Ms.
Shoba Broota, renowned Painter, to Guyana to draw a
portrait of Dr. Cheddi Jagan, former President of Guyana.
The Council provided Orientation Grant to Ms. Preethi
Ganegoda and Ms. Suryakala Chandrika from Sri Lanka
and Dr. Danuta Satsik, Head Department of South Asian
Studies, Warsaw University, Poland.

Creative Dialogue (Award/Seminar/
Symposia)
Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International
Understanding
The Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International
Understanding 2003 was conferred on Mr. Goh Chok
Tong, former Prime Minister of Singapore on 9 July 2004
at a special ceremony organized at Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Maulana Azad Essay Competition
The Award Presentation Ceremony for the Maulana Azad
Essay Competition 2002 was held on 4 September 2004
at Vice-President’s House. The Vice-President gave away
the Awards to the Winners.
The Council provided financial assistance to Society for
Indian Ocean Studies, Hyderabad for organizing an
international seminar “India’s Cultural Diplomacy in
South East Asia : Challenges and Opportunities” held
from 3-5 July 2004; and to the Asiatic Society of Mumbai
for holding a two-day conference “Re-Visioning Mumbai”
held on 29-30 October 2004.
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Memorial Lecture
Instituted in 1958, as a mark of honour to the memory of
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the Memorial Lectures are
intended to contribute towards the promotion of better
understanding among different people of the world. Pt.

Jawaharlal Nehru, Prime Minister of India, delivered the
first lecture. Lord Meghnad Desai delivered the 36th
Maulana Azad Memorial Lecture on 14 December 2004
on the topic “Globalisation and Culture”. Dr. Najma
Heptulla, Hon’ble President, ICCR presided over the
function. Former President Shri K.R. Narayanan, Leader
of Opposition in Rajya Sabha Shri Jaswant Singh,
Members of Parliament from Lok Sabha & Rajya Sabha,
diplomats, acadmicians and eminent persons from
different walks of life attended the Lecture.
Performing Arts
During the period, the ICCR sponsored the visits of 64
Outgoing Cultural Delegations to 70 countries, covering
all continents of the world. Special emphasis was given
to holding workshops-cum-lecture demonstrations with
local artistes, in addition to performances. A significant
number of younger artistes and folk group formed part of
these delegations.
Some of the major festivals/events in which Indian
performing groups participated were “2nd SAARC cultural
Festival” in Bangladesh, “Annual Thyagaraja Festival” at
Cleveland in USA, “Sacral Music Festival” in Poland,
“Heritage India Festival” in USA, “Summer Festival of
Dubrovnik for 2004” in Croatia, “World Tea Festival” in
Russia, “Fashion Show” in CIS countries, “Anniversary
of Panchsheel” in China, “Spring Festival” and
“Gwacheon Festival” in South Korea, “Gramstown
Theatre Festival” in South Africa, “150 years of arrival of
Indian Labour” in Guyana, “150 Years of Arrival of
Indians” in Carrabian, “Hue Festival” in Vietnam, “Festival
of India” in Colombia, “Theatre Festival” in Oslo,”Days
of Indian Culture” in Canada, “Oslo Festival” in Dublin,
Edinburgh Festival” in United Kingdom, “Mini India
Festival” in Belgrade, “Tolosa International Puppet
Festival, India Window” in Spain, “Cerventino Festival”
in Mexico, “Barcelona Festival” in Venezuela, and “Imtrat
Raising Day Celebrations” in Bhutan.
During the period the Council sponsored a 4-member
Vocal group to Pakistan and an 8-member Qawwali group
to Myanmar. The Council has plans to send 5 classical/
performing groups to Germany, Australia, New Zealand,
Mauritius, and Kathmandu upto March 2005.
The ICCR organizes the visits of performing artistes/
troupes to India from countries all over the world for
performances in various cities of India. These groups are

161

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

hosted under the ambit of bilateral Cultural Exchange
Programmes as well as in response to recommendations
of the Indian Missions abroad and requests received from
Foreign Diplomatic Missions/Cultural Centres in
India.During the period, the Council hosted the visit of 8
foreign cultural troupes to India from 8 countries. These
groups were hosted from Trinidad & Tobago, Egypt,
Croatia, Nepal, Indonesia, Angola, Poland and Sri Lanka
under the ambit of existing Cultural Exchange
Programmes (CEP) and outside CEPs.
The Council from many years has been organizing
performances by emerging and outstanding artistes
respectively, under the “Horizon” and “Retrospectives”,
series in New Delhi and other cities. The Council under
its “Retrospectives” Series organized the performances by
eminent empanelled artistes. The Council also organized
Dance and Music performance by foreign artistes residing
in India.

Miscellaneous Projects
As a part of the commitment made by the Prime Minister
of India to the Cambodian Government, the Council has
established five computer kiosks for use by children of
under-privileged and downtrodden society of Cambodia.
The efforts made by the Council on behalf of the
Government of India were welcomed and well received
by the Combodian side.The Council has also been
assigned the work relating to establishment of a Traditional
Asian Textile Museum in Cambodia. While the project is
being financed by the Government of India, the Cambodia
Government is providing land for the same.

Accounts
ICCR’s approved Budget Estimates for the year 2004-05
are Rs. 5590.00 lakhs. The expected receipt is Rs. 40.00
lakhs.

162

Indian Council of World Affairs

T

he Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) was
founded in 1943 with a view to encourage the study of
Indian and international affairs. It is one of the most
prestigious centres for the study of international relations
in the country. After being declared as an institution of
national importance, the ICWA pursued a vigorous
programme of activities in pursuance of its mandate. It
aimed to provide through its seminars, publications,
lectures, and a specialized library, information for basic
understanding of the complexities of the international
system.

Sapru House Building
Major civil repairs were undertaken and will soon be
completed. Sapru House is being restored to the status
appropriate for housing an institution of national
importance. The portion of the Sapru House building
occupied by the Children’s Film Society and Maharaja
Ranjit Singh Trust have since been vacated. The portion
vacated by them will be utilized for the use of research
scholars.

Grant-in-Aid
ICWA’s grants-in-aid for the year 2004-05 was projected
and approved for Rs.1.65 crores.

Publications
Besides its periodical publications, India Quarterly and
Foreign Affairs Report, the Council brought out other
publications namely: Third Africa Day Lecture delivered
by Shri Shashank, former Foreign Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs.

CSCAP India Secretariat and Africa
Centre
The Council for Security and Cooperation in the AsiaPacific (CSCAP) India Secretariat was relocated in the
Sapru House. The Seminars on the topics viz. (1) “China:
A Growing Power in South East Asia”. (2) “Cooperation
in Combating Terrorism in the Bay of Bengal (BIMSTEC)

24

Region” and (3) “From Bali to Vientiane: Road Map for
India-ASEAN Partnership”, were organized at Sapru
House under the Chairmanship of Ambassador A.N. Ram.
A seminar on the topic “Elections in Indonesia”, was
organized which was presided by Prof. S. D. Muni of JNU.
Distinguished journalists and academicians attended these
seminars.

Library
The Sapru House Library, after repairs, renovation,
extension of space, is air-conditioned and has been
bettered for use as reference library for international affairs.
During the period, a significant addition of 994 titles of
books, serials and bound periodicals were made to its
strong existing collection. The Library has received 390
titles of research journals and important dailies from India
and abroad. Out of these 201 titles of eminent journals
were indexed as part of its ‘Current Awareness Service’
to the research scholars. About 3700 entries of important
articles on international relations and world politics were
prepared from research journals both Indian and foreign.
As part of bibliographical support to the users, Select Lists
of Articles on Current Affairs were prepared for
publication in the Foreign Affairs Report Vol. 2 and 3
from July 2003 to September 2004 of the ICWA.
Under fully depository scheme of the UNDP about 5350
new documents were received from the United Nation in
New York and were added to its collection. Similarly,
approximately 1600 European Union and Indian
Government publications were received by the Library
and made available to the users. Beside, 36000 press
clippings were culled out from 8 major national dailies
and 4 regional newspapers raising the number of its
collection to 2.9 million approximately.
More than 10,608 visitors used the library for their
research work and reference. During this period 219
research scholars, subject experts, journalists and others
were enrolled as members of the Library. Research students
from different universities and colleges have made use of
library material for their research work. The important

163

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

universities were Aligarh Muslim University, University
of Kumaon, Madurai University, Karnataka University,
University of Bangalore, Deen Dayal Upadhayay
University, Gorakhpur, Gulab Singh Hindu College,
Bijnor, University of Allahabad, Jawahar Lal Nehru
University, Himachal Pradesh University, Simla,
University of Delhi, Kurushetra University etc.
To promote the study of African nations, the library has
added valuable reading material in Africa Centre
exclusively created in the library. The automation work
of the library is in progress. A separate multi-media section
has been created for this purpose.

Seminars/Symposia/Conferences
The ICWA conducted a number of seminars, symposia
and conferences during the period under the report.
Special Lectures were delivered by H.E. Dr. Cheikh
Tidiane Gadio, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Senegal, His Highness Prince Radu of HohenzollernVeringen, Romania. The Council organized a major
International Seminar on “Panchsheel”, which was
attended by thirteen foreign delegates and six Indian

delegates. External Affairs Minister Shri K.Natwar Singh
inaugurated the seminar. An International Seminar on
“Emerging Trends in Indo-African Relations” was also
organized by the council which was inaugurated by
Minister of State for External Affairs Shri.Rao Inderjit
Singh. A complete list is at Appendix XX.
The Council proposes to hold following Lectures/
Seminars in the months of February and March
2005
February 2005
i)

Series of Lectures on: Report of U.N.S.G.’s High
Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change.

ii)

Lecture on: Nuclear Weapons and the Anomalies
of Global Governance- by Prof. Ramesh Thakur,
Senior Vice-Rector, United Nations University.

March 2005
Panel discussion on:
a)

Elections in Palestine.

b)

Follow up of SAARC Summit.

c)

Elections in Iraq.

164

Research and Information System
for Developing Countries (RIS)

R

IS is New Delhi based think-tank specialized in
international economic relations and development
cooperation. RIS is an autonomous body of the Ministry
of External Affairs. Its mandate includes functioning as
an advisory body to the Government of India on matters
pertaining to multilateral economic and social issues,
including regional and subregional cooperation
arrangements, as may be referred to it from time to time.
RIS is envisioned as a forum for fostering effective policy
dialogue among developing country think-tanks on
international economic issues.
Highlights of the RIS’ work during the year 2004-05 are
presented below:

Research and Policy Inputs Provided to
the Government
RIS conducted research studies to assist the policy
formulation and preparations for major Summit Meetings
and other negotiations held in the year. Some of these
inputs include the followings:
India-ASEAN Summit and Related Events: RIS
had prepared a document on ASEAN-India Vision
2020 in consultation with ASEAN think-tanks
which formed the basis of the Partnership
Agreement signed at the Vientiane Summit held in
November 2004. RIS provided inputs to Ministry of
External Affairs and PMO in preparations of the
Summit including notes on Asian Economic
Community. Inputs were also provided to PMO in
preparation for the India-ASEAN Business Summit
held in New Delhi in October 2004.
SAARC Ministerial Meeting: A Note on “SAFTA
and Beyond: An Agenda for SAARC” was sent to
Hon’ble External Affairs Minister, Government of
India on 17 July 2004 following a briefing meeting
called by him.
Preparations for the Dhaka Summit of SAARC:
RIS has prepared two policy notes on the future
directions of SAARC and submitted to the Ministry
of External Affairs (MEA). In addition, a note has
165

25

been submitted to the PMO in preparation of the
Summit that has now been postponed.
NAM Ministerial Meeting Durban, South Africa,
17-19August 2004: RIS participated in the
discussion meetings organized by the Ministry of
External Affairs in New Delhi, respectively on 6
August 2004 and 11 August 2004, for inputs for the
mid-term Ministerial Meeting of NAM.
Subsequently a Note on Economic Agenda for
NAM was sent on 12 August 2004.
BIMSTEC Summit: Revised Report on Future
Directions of BIMSTEC: Towards a Bay of Bengal
Economic Community was provided to the MEA.
India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA): RIS prepared
a study on the Potential Economic Partnership
between India, Brazil and South Africa at the request
of Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry.
India-China Joint Study Group: As a member of
the group, DG-RIS participated in the Meetings of
the JSG held in Delhi (July 2004) and Beijing
(December 2004). RIS assisted in drafting a number
of chapters of the JSG draft Report besides preparing
draft Indian inputs on behalf of the MEA.
India-Korea Joint Study Group: DG-RIS has been
appointed a member of the JSG and participated in
the first meeting of the Group held in New Delhi in
January 2005. RIS is also assisting in preparation of
draft chapters of the Report.
UNCTAD XI: RIS prepared a policy brief on the
agenda of UNCTAD XI to assist the preparation
for the event in India and other developing
countries. This policy brief was circulated among
the member country delegations and among the
NGOs.
WTO/NAMA Negotiations: RIS has been assisting
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in
preparations for the ongoing WTO negotiations
especially Non-Agricultural Market Access
(NAMA) negotiations with notes and analytical

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

inputs. RIS has regularly provided simulations and
sensitivity analysis of different proposals during the
period under review.
Expert Group on Preferential Rules of Origin: RIS
is represented on the Expert Group set up by the
Government of India, 2004 and was assigned by the
Department of Commerce the task of preparing a
study to identify products that do not qualify change
of industrial classification. RIS has submitted inputs
in the context of different RTAs being negotiated
by India and presentations have been made at the
meetings of the Group on the subject.
India-Mercosur PTA: RIS assisted the ongoing
negotiations on India-Mercosur PTA with inputs on
sensitivity analysis of Indian products and on rules
of origin provided to the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry.
SAFTA Negotiations: Submitted inputs on SAFTA
Rules of Origin, for Ministry of Commerce,
Government India, July 2004.
India-Thailand FTA: RIS participated in a number
of panel discussions for the Government of India –
UNCTAD study on identification of sensitive items.
Inter-Ministerial Consultative Group on ‘Trade
and Environment’: RIS has been appointed as the
Lead Institute for an Expert Group of the
Consultative Group constituted jointly by the
Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) and
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI).
In addition, major on-going studies at RIS during the
period under review include a roadmap for an Asian
Economic Community including sectoral cooperation,
preparatory work for the Hong Kong Ministerial
Conference of WTO, regional trade arrangements and
developing countries, potential of Mekong-Ganga
partnership, strategic approach for strengthening the
international competitiveness in knowledge-based
industries; promotion of export- orientated
industrialization, on employment generation potential of
export-oriented manufacturing, issues concerning
biodiversity, biosafety and development of capacity for
biotechnology, among others.

Policy Dialogue, Conferences and
Symposia
During 2004-05 RIS organized a number of policy
dialogues, conferences and symposia to fulfill its mandate
of fostering intellectual dialogue among developing
countries. Major events organized in the period include:

High-Level Conference on Asian Economic
Integration: Vision of a New Asia, Tokyo, 18-19
November 2004
The high-level conference was organized by RIS in
collaboration with the Council on East Asian Community
(CEAC), Tokyo; Development Research Centre (DRC)
for the State Council of China, Beijing; Global Security
Research Institute (G-SEC), Keio University, Tokyo;
Malaysian Institute of Economic Research (MIER), Kuala
Lumpur; and with the support of Sasakawa Peace
Foundation, Tokyo. It was attended by heads or senior
experts of leading think-tanks of Asia. It was a follow-up
of an earlier conference organized by RIS in New Delhi
in March 2003 to promote the agenda of a broader Asian
economic cooperation. Hon’ble Mr. Koichi Kato, Member
of Japanese Diet delivered the inaugural address. Among
the distinguished experts who addressed the conference
include Professor E. Sakakibara, former Vice-Minister of
Finance, Japan; Dr Rodolfo Severino, former SecretaryGeneral of ASEAN; Prof. Zhang Xiaoji, Director-General,
DRC, Beijing; Dr Eric Teo, Council Secretary, Singapore
Institute for International Affairs; Dr Djisman
Simandjuntak, Chairman, CSIS, Jakarta; Professor
Mohammed Ariff, Executive Director, MIER, Kuala
Lumpur; Ambassador M. Xuto, Executive Director, ITD,
Bangkok; Prof. Yao Chao Cheng, Dean, Shanxi University,
Taiyuan, China; Dr Chan-Hyun Sohn, Senior Fellow,
KIEP, Seoul; Professor T. Ide, former Vice Minister, EPA,
Japan; Professor A. Seth, President, G-SEC, Tokyo; Prof.
Ito Kenichi, President, CEAC, Tokyo; Shri B.J. Panda,
Hon’ble MP, India; Ambassador Shashank, former Foreign
Secretary, India; Ambassador S.T. Devare, Vice Chairman, RIS; Dr Nagesh Kumar, DG-RIS; Mr Rahul
Khullar, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry, India; Dr Rajiv Kumar, Chief Economist, CII;
senior officials of ADB, UN-ESCAP, among many others.
The conference issued a statement calling for launch of
an Asian Economic Community in a phased manner to
begin with Japan, ASEAN, China, India and Korea
(JACIK).
India-ASEAN Eminent Persons Lecture by
Secretary- General, ASEAN, New Delhi, 18
October 2004
RIS jointly with the Ministry of External Affairs organized
the Fifteenth India-ASEAN Eminent Persons Lecture by
H.E. Mr. Ong Keng Yong, Secretary-General, ASEAN on
18 October 2004 in New Delhi. H.E. Mr. Ong Keng Yong
spoke on “Forging ASEAN-India: Partnership for the 21st
Century”. Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for
External Affairs, chaired. DG-RIS welcomed the delegates

166

Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS)

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and Minister of Commerce and Industry Mr. Kamal Nath at inauguration of the 3rd Indo-ASEAN
Business Summit. Also seen in the picture (from left) are Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission, Shri Montek Singh Ahluwalia;
H.E. Mr. Ong Keng Yong, Secretary General, ASEAN; FICCI President Shri Y. K. Modi and Shri Y.C. Deveswar, Vice President, CII.

From left to right: Dr. Nagesh Kumar, Director General, RIS; Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for External Affairs; H.E. Mr. Ong
Keng Yong, Secretary General ASEAN; and Shri Rajiv Sikri, Secretary (East), Ministry of External Affairs at the India-ASEAN Eminent
Persons Lecture.

167

Annual Report 2004 - 2005

and Ambassador Rajiv Sikri, Secretary (East), Ministry
of External Affairs extended a vote of thanks.
Regional Conference on SAARC: Post-Islamabad
Challenges, New Delhi, 31 August 2004
This Conference was organized by RIS jointly with South
Asia Centre for Policy Studies (SACEPS) with
participation by senior experts from Bangladesh, Pakistan,
Nepal, Sri Lanka, Maldives and India. The conference
addressed the issues concerning challenges to the
implementation of SAFTA, potential for cooperation in
energy issues as well as evolving a regional approach to
poverty and social issues. Late Shri J. N. Dixit, the then
National Security Adviser, delivered the inaugural address.
Among the distinguished experts who addressed the
Conference included Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, Hon’ble
Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas; Professor Arjun
Sengupta, Chairman, RIS; Professor Rehaman Sobhan,
Executive Director, SACEPS; Professor Muchkund Dubey,
President, CSD; Dr. Mohan Man Sainju, Chairman, IIDS,
Kathmandu; Dr Sman Kelegama, Executive Director,
Institute for Policy Studies, Colombo; Dr. Kamal Hossain,
Former Foreign Minister of Bangladesh; Dr Akmal
Hussain, Member of Economic Advisory Board to the
President of Pakistan; and Dr. Abhijit Sen, Member,
Planning Commission.
International Conference on Biotechnology for
Asian Development; New Delhi, 7-8 April 2004
This conference was organized by RIS in collaboration
with CII and IUCN and with the support of UNESCO
and the Department of Biotechnology, Government of
India. Shri K. C. Pant, then Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission inaugurated the Conference. The
Conference was addressed by leading experts on the
subject from several Asian countries and covered sessions
on Biotechnology and Food Security in Asia: Priorities
and Challenges; Biotechnology and IPR Regime:
International Developments and Policy Options; Trade,
Labeling, Traceability and Issues in Biosafety
Management; Socio-Economic Analysis and Studies on
Biotechnology; Public-Private Partnerships in
Biotechnology: Issues, Modalities and Lessons; Country
Specific Experiences and Options for Asian Regional
Cooperation in Biotechnology; and devoted a special
panel discussion to Agricultural Biotechnology in India.
National Workshop on Strategic Approach to
Strengthening International Competitiveness in
Knowledge-based Industries, New Delhi, 13
August 2004
This workshop was organized by RIS jointly with the

Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Ministry
of Science and Technology. Shri Rao Inderjit Singh,
Honourable Minister of State for External Affairs
inaugurated the Workshop and Dr. George B. Assaf,
Director, UNIDO, New Delhi delivered a keynote lecture.
The Workshop covered presentations of studies prepared
by RIS faculty and consultants as a part of the DSIR
project on the subject and commentaries by policy makers
and industry representatives from select technology
intensive branches of industry.
Seminar on National Innovation System:
Experience of Select Asian Countries, New Delhi,
14 January 2005
This seminar was chaired by Professor Ashok
Parthasarathi, Centre for Study of Science Policy,
Jawaharlal Nehru University and had a keynote
presentation by Dr. Se-Jun Yoon, Director, Asia and Pacific
Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT), New Delhi.
The other presentations were ‘The Case of Thailand’ by
Dr. Patarapong Intarakumnerd, Project Leader, National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA),
Thailand; ‘The Case of Vietnam’ by Dr. Bach Tan Sinh,
Acting Director, National Institute for Science and
Technology Policy and Strategy Studies (NISTPSS),
Vietnam; ‘The Case of India’ by Professor K.J. Joseph,
Visiting Senior Fellow, and ‘The Case of Singapore’ by Dr
Sachin Chaturvedi, Fellow RIS.
Outreach, Global Presence and Networking
In order to increase international visibility and outreach,
an attempt has been made to participate in major
international events relevant to the work of RIS. As a
part of this, RIS has obtained a Consultative Status with
UNCTAD, WTO and NAM and has participated in the
preparatory processes for the high level meetings to
influence the international development agenda. The
growing international recognition of RIS work on
multilateral trade negotiations led to an invitation by the
WTO Secretariat to address a key panel at the WTO
Public Symposium held in Geneva in May 2004. RIS has
also taken steps to strengthen networking with other
policy think-tanks for collaborative activities. A MoU has
been signed with the Development Research Centre
(DRC) of the State Council of China for a regular policy
dialogue following the first dialogue conducted in New
Delhi in March 2004. DRC, Malaysian Institute of
Economic Research, and the Council of East Asian
Community, Japan also collaborated with RIS in
organization of the High-level Conference in Tokyo. RIS
also received delegations from Shanxi University of

168

Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS)

Economics in China and from Institute of World
Economics and Politics in Hanoi, Vietnam to establish
institutional links. Relationship with the Institute for
Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS) Singapore was further
strengthened during the year with joint publication of
three books and with the proposal of organizing the
Second ASEAN-India Forum in India in 2005 jointly.
Relationship with IPS, Sri Lanka; ITD, Bangkok and
Centre for Policy Dialogue, Dhaka have continued to grow
stronger with BIMSTEC report being produced in
collaboration with them. RIS has also strengthened links
with Pakistan Institute for Development Economics
(PIDE) which hosted a seminar to launch RIS’ South Asia
Development and Cooperation Report 2004 in Islamabad at
the Pakistan Planning Commission Auditorium in August
2004. RIS has also collaborated with the South Asia
Centre for Policy Studies (SACEPS) presently
headquartered at Dhaka in co-hosting a number of
seminars including a joint conference in Dhaka in May
2004 on SAARC economic integration issues and launch
of RIS 2004 Report. RIS had launched a New Asia Forum
as a network of institutions and experts to promote
regional economic integration in Asia. This network has
developed with its own dedicated website
www.newasiaforum.org and a quarterly journal New Asia
Monitor which have been received well. The Forum
website is fast becoming a rich repository of news, analysis
and documentation on Asia’s development prospects and
regional cooperation and the journal, a forum for exchange
of information, resources and analysis on regional
economic cooperation in Asia.
UN-ESCAP has invited RIS to be a member of the
Institutional Advisory Board (IAB) for its Asia-Research
Network on Trade (ARTNET) representing India and to
participate in its meetings. RIS collaborated with the
Asian Development Bank (Manila) for its High-Level
Conference on Asian Economic Cooperation, besides
discussions on possible funding of two research projects.
UNCTAD, Geneva consulted RIS in connection with its
World Investment Report 2004 and International Food
Policy Research Institute (Washington) has commissioned
a study on seed industry besides ongoing collaboration in
food safety project along with Universities of Melbourne
and ANU and Thammasat University in Bangkok. IUCNAsia Region based in Colombo has signed a MoU with
RIS for research collaboration besides jointly organizing
a conference on biotechnology in Asia. Commonwealth
Secretariat, London has also commissioned a study at RIS.
RIS has been designated as the Academic Arm Unit from
India for the Asian Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) and

participated at the ACD Think-Tanks Symposium held
at Bangkok on 15-17 December 2004.

Capacity Building
Programmes

and

Training

Visiting Research Fellowships in International
Economic Issues and Development Policy
Research
RIS in collaboration with India Technical and Economic
Cooperation (ITEC) Programme of the MEA,
Government of India has instituted a Visiting Research
Fellowships Programme in international development
policy research for researchers and officials from
developing countries. Under this programme, RIS receives
three Visiting Fellows each year for duration of four
months each. Visiting fellows for the 2004/05 have started
their programme in January 2005.
Training Module for IFS Officer Trainees, 23-27
August 2004
RIS offered a five-day Training Module on International
Economic Issues for the IFS Officer Trainees of 2003 Batch
from 23-27 August 2004. During their stay at RIS, the
Officers were given an orientation in various issues
concerning trade in multilateral, regional and bilateral
fora. The faculty for the module comprised senior faculty
members of RIS as well as select experts from outside
associated with RIS.
Training Programme on RTAs/FTAs for the
Officers of Tariff Commission
RIS has been approached by the Tariff Commission to
organize a training programme on regional and bilateral
trade arrangements for its officials in March 2005. This
programme covers various issues concerning the regional
and bilateral trade arrangements and their implications.

RIS Publications
During 2004-05 RIS published seven books, issued two
policy briefs and 18 Discussion Papers (Appendix XXI)
during the period. Two issues each of the South Asia
Economic Journal and the Biotechnology and Development
Review and four issues of New Asia Monitor were brought
out in addition to four issues of RIS Diary. RIS publications
can now be downloaded from its website: www.ris.org.in
and www.newasiaforum.org

Budget
RIS received a budgetary support of Rupees 137 lakhs
during 2004-05 from the Ministry of External Affairs.

169

Library

T

o support research, the Ministry’s Library has modern
information technology equipment and rich resource
materials, with over one hundred thousand books and a
large collection of maps, microfilms and official
documents. The Library receives and maintains 600
periodical titles. It has in-house computer systems
consisting of a server, 7 PCs and 8 terminals including
some supporting data entry and retrieval in Hindi. It has
CD-ROM work station and CD-ROM databases on
foreign affairs and current affairs. The Library is also
equipped with a CD-writer, a colour scanner (with OCR
capability as well as facility for storage and retrieval of
images), a microfilm/fiche reader printer, plain paper
photocopier, as well as a VTR and colour monitor and a
laser printer with desktop publishing (DTP) software. This
has enabled better presentation of publications and
documents of the Library/Division.
All Documentation/Bibliographic Services as well as other
library operations and services have been computerized,
using an integrated library software package. Information
on all books, maps, documents and selected periodical
articles received in the Library since 1986 [and pre-1986
publications in active use] are available on-line through
each terminal/computer in main library Patiala House.
Our officials both at Headquarters and in our Mission
abroad can also access library’s information databases on
Internet on Ministry of External Affairs Library’s website:
www.mealib.nic.in

26

“Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin”– a list of
selected articles on International Relations.
“Recent Additions” – an annotated list of
publications added to the Library.

CD – ROM Publication (s)
The Library in cooperation with NIC has brought out a
full text CD-ROM version of Annual Reports of Ministry
of External Affairs [from 1948 to 1998-99] and Foreign
Affairs Record [from 1955 to 1999 (August)]. The
information on the CD can be retrieved via combination
of searches including search on any given word or
combination of words. The CD-ROM version was
prepared based on material available as on 1 January 2000.
This CD can be consulted in the main library of the
Ministry at Patiala House, New Delhi. Process for its
revised/updated edition has started and it is likely to be
issued next year.
Further, the Ministry of External Affairs Library has gone
in for LIBSYS: an integrated Library management software
covering all the features of Library. LIBSYS follows MARC
and supports both print and non-print materials. It
facilitates import/export of data in standard exchange
format such as MARC format. LIBSYS supports wordbased free text searching using Boolean operators. LIBSYS
provides online validation of input data prior to updating
the database.

The library’s Internet facilities are being gradually made
available to visiting users who include Research Scholars
and former Foreign Service Officers. Library now also
welcomes users to submit their reference queries while
surfing Library’s website or though e-mail. Answers to
these queries where possible are sent through e-mail for
faster response.

Library users including research scholars are welcome to
access the Library’s website or the on-line computer-based
information in the Library at Patiala House, New Delhi
in different databases, including CD-ROM databases, and
the Foreign Affairs Information Retrieval System (FAIRS).
Photocopying and computer printout facilities are also
available to all library users including research scholars.

All new documents received in the Library – books, maps,
microfilms, selected articles from periodicals – are being
fed into the in-house computer system to create a database
on foreign affairs. Using this database and CD-ROM
databases, the Library provides Current Awareness
Services and Bibliographical and Research Services. In
additions, the Library regularly publishes:

Recently Library has also initiated steps towards
establishment of virtual library. It has started to provide
important full text articles available on net through email to senior Foreign Service officers and the response
in this regard has been very encouraging.

170

Welfare

W

elfare Division looks after general welfare of all
employees of Ministry of External Affairs and management
of canteen services at South Block, Akbar Bhawan and
Patiala House. During the year 2004-2005, the Ministry
of External Affairs lost five employees for whom all
assistance were rendered by the Division for
hospitalization, funeral and ex-gratia payment from Staff
Benefit fund. On this Division’s recommendation External
Affairs Spouses Association (EASA) presented cheques
amounting to Rs. 20,000/- each to the six dependents of
deceased employees of the Ministry of External Affairs.
There were five students for MBBS, seventeen for
engineering and one for Diploma course, for whom the
Division carried out formalities with the Ministry of
Health and Ministry of Human Resource Development.
55 seats in Kendriya Vidyalaya were utilized by the children
of the officers/staff of the Ministry of External Affairs.
Cases with the Police authorities were taken up to the
satisfaction of concerned officials. During the year, other
welfare measures undertaken by the Division were
arrangements for collection of funds for Flag Days for

27

Communal Harmony, Red Cross, Armed Forces and
Ministry of External Affairs Staff Benefit Fund.
Two dependents were employed in Ministry of External
Affairs against regular LDC posts on compassionate
grounds and one on daily wages during 2004. A pathbreaking policy initiative has been taken for giving priority
to dependents of deceased employees of the Ministry of
External Affairs in appointment on daily wages in all
offices of Ministry of External Affairs. A secure transport
service has been started for families returning from abroad
during night-time. In the area of stress management ‘Art
of Living’ course was conducted at Headquarters and a
paper with questionnaire on Stress Management in
Missions abroad has been circulated for benefit of Ministry
of External Affairs employees working abroad. The
Division has been active in promoting awareness for team
spirit through various circulars. A parallel catering outlet
has been proposed to be set up in South Block for
providing quality product and professional services for the
visiting Diplomatic Corps and international visitors as well
as for VIP’s.

171

Appendix I
Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during 2004-2005 (including posts
budgeted by Ministry of Commerce & those held in abeyance/ex-cadred)
S. No

Cadre/Post

Posts at
Headquaters

Posts at
Mission

Total

1

Grade I

4

22

26

2

Grade II

5

20

25

3

Grade III

35

118

153

4

Grade IV

37

99

136

5

Jr. Admn. Grade/Senior Scale

48

132

180

6

(I)

Junior Scale

1

29

30

(ii)

Probationers Reserve

27

..

27

(iii)

Leave Reserve

15

..

15

(iv)

Deputation Reserve

19

..

19

(v)

Training Reserve

7

..

7

43

100

143+60*

IFS(B)
7
8

9

10

11

**12
13

(I)

Grade I

(ii)

Deputation Reserve

6

..

6

(i)

Grade II/III

96

178

274+94*

(ii)

Leave Reserve

30

..

30

(iii)

Deputation Reserve

16

..

16

(iv)

Training Reserve

25

..

25

(I)

Grade IV

203

407

610

(ii)

Leave Reserve

60

..

60

(iii)

Deputation Reserve

55

..

55

(I)

Grade V/VI

250

193

443

(ii)

Leave Reserve

60

..

60

(iii)

Deputation Reserve

14

..

14

(I)

Grade II of Cypher Cadre
(Cypher Assistant)

49

143

192

(ii)

Leave Reserve

24

..

24

(I)

Private Secretary

35

199

234

(ii)

Leave Reserve

14

..

14

(I)

Personal Assistant

130

195

325

(ii)

Leave Reserve

33

..

33

(iii)

Training Reserve (Hindi)

10

..

10

(iv)

Deputation Reserve

12

..

12

14

Stenographer(Gr. III)

17

77

94

15

Interpreters’ Cadre

6

27

33

16

L&T Cadre

14

1

15

(* Post created/reduced as a result of Carde Review)
(** The figure for Private Secretary include 60 posts which have been upgraded to Principal Private Secretary (PPS). Out of 60 posts
of PPS, 22 posts have further been upgraded to Sr PPS.)

173

Appendix II
Recruitment made in various groups in the Ministry of External Affairs and reserved vacancies
filled by Schedule Caste/Schedule Tribe/Other Backward Classes(OBC) categories from April
to November 2004
Group

Total No.of Posts

Number of Posts
Reserved

Unreserved

SC

ST

OBC

Group-A

82

14

6

6

56

Group-A (Ex Cadre)

1

1

-

-

-

Group-B

346

56

21

1

268

Group-C

30

11

2

3

14

Group-D

1

-

-

-

1

Total

460

82

29

10

339

Appendix III
Language-wise Statement of Officers (Grade - I to Junior Scale of IFS)
as on 30 November 2004
Language

Number of Officers

Language

Number of Officers

Arabic

88

Thai

2

Bhasa Indonesia

13

Tibetan

2

Chinese

56

Turkish

6

French

70

Dutch

1

German

30

Gorkhali

1

5

Swedish

1

Malay Bhasa

1

Hungarian

1

Vietnames

1

Burmese

1

Mandarin

1

Ukranian

1

Kazakh

1

Hebrew

3

Italian
Japanese

24

Kiswahili

8

Nepalese

3

Persian

21

Portuguese

17

Russian

75

Serbo Crotian

3

Sinhalese

2

Spanish

59

174

Appendix IV
Statement showing the number of applications received and passports issued including
under Tatkaal Scheme, miscellaneous applications received and services rendered as well
as Revenue(including revenue under Tatkaal Scheme) and Expenditure figures of the
Passport Offices from 1st January, 2004 to 31st December, 2004.
Name of
RPO/PO

No. of
Applications
received

No. of
No. of
Passports miscellanissued
eous
applications
received

Miscellaneous
services
rendered

Passports
issued
under
Tatkaal
Scheme
7130

Ahmedabad

214443

235335

17895

19129

Bangalore

Revenue
under
Tatkaal
Scheme

Total
Revenue

Total
expenditure

8991000 223777698 28635772

170826

167010

28620

28418

Bareilly

44680

41989

3256

3202

1519

2281000

Bhopal

53519

43970

4913

4873

3199

4273000

57478750

5453458

Bhubaneswar

26594

20987

1986

1963

1150

1538000

48293740

7478470

204326

184987

24525

22225

7168

Chandigarh

10421 13051500 186016217 22930889
47278899

8541252

10376000 233409010 22685557

Chennai

230529

216367

29240

26299

22735 32810000 273633931 26797069

Cochin

176339

177863

34810

34620

15754 22020800 202075031 23146142

Delhi

207773

158258

32280

31515

16024 29103700 235239387 44808025

49831

40280

6178

6023

Ghaziabad

2618

3853600

52779867

5410259

2184

3643000

23724000

3508246

Guwahati

18978

18055

1431

649

Hyderabad

273128

284753

33060

32292

Jaipur

136424

106091

9170

6592

6183

7896500 145411946 16695741

Jalandhar

168418

166425

18076

17402

1032

2001825 189702537 19319598

23927 46088800 413615858 32104067

Jammu

14250

11206

899

869

463

Kolkata

115006

114542

12611

12388

3595

Kozhikode

238217

237355

24236

23811

Lucknow

161051

133238

10114

9432

Mumbai

228982

218355

29063

Nagpur

26215

24515

1889

Panaji

23515

23913

Patna

71366

Pune

62426

642500

16142080

3028782

5053400 124373517 13571022

23802 33745500 284480096 24313113
1985

2796000 158518793 24256675

28261

8914

15960000 240410545 50305451

1757

2437

3120500

29099300

3690337

7903

7780

2187

3167500

30825996

4643352

53901

3181

3084

658

870000

67563900

7825316

60009

8305

8231

5082

6458500

68859185

8738149

Ranchi

19525

15277

1734

1469

1294

1722800

21390600

2822167

Srinagar

12020

10585

933

919

430

589300

13072069

5321697

Surat

69798

61820

5441

5029

2473

3117600

70957870

*

Thane

87686

79072

8766

8657

4529

6710500

94115910

**

Trichy

222368

261803

20937

19307

10581 14785000 278581040 26302129

Trivandrum

121765

119594

22804

21534

15359 21599000 152265994 14962055

Vishakhapatnam 65832

65225

8072

7868

3352780

412328

395598

TOTAL

3515830

2082

3003700

7175366

2069153112705254056919551464470156

* expenditure included in RPO Ahmedabad’s as LOC combined with RPO Ahmedabad.
** expenditure included in RPO Mumbai’s as LOC combined with RPO Mumbai.

175

73825785

Appendix V
Finances of the Ministry of
External Affairs in 2004-2005

MEA Expenditure and Budget (2001-02-2004-05)

The Budget Allocation of Ministry of
External Affairs in the Budget Estimates
(BE) 2004-2005 is Rs. 3640.49 crores
which is an enhancement over BE 20032004 by Rs. 230.69 crores i.e. by 6.77%.
There is an increase in the Revised
Estimates for 2004-2005 by Rs. 244.31
crores i.e. by 6.71%.

Years

Actuals (in Rs Crores)

%age variation

2000-2001

2488.85

Nil

2001-2002

2624.55

5.45%

2002-2003

3253.79

23.98

2003-2004

3344.91

2.8%

2004-2005 (BE)

3640.69

8.84%

2004-2005 (RE)

3885.00

6.71%

Appendix VI
The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2004-2005 Budget
Sectors
MEA Secretariat

Allocation (in Rs Crores)
118.30

Embassies and Missions

896.26

Passport and Emigration

159.98

Special Diplomatic Expenditure

841.01

Technical & Economic Cooperation

1326.39

Contributions to International Organisations

61.50

Grant to Indian Council for Cultural Relations

57.50

Loans and Advances to Foreign Governments

298.88

Others

125.18

Principal Allocations in the Final Estimates 2004-05
Loans and Adv. to Forg.
MEA Secretariat
Gov.
3%
8%
Grant to ICCR
2%
Embassies and Missions
24%

Contributions to Intl. Orgs.
2%

Tech. & Eco. Coop.
35%

Passport & Emigration
4%

Spl. Dip. Expenditure.
22%

176

Appendix VII
Principal Destinations of India’s Aid
Programmes
The principal beneficiaries of our Aid & Loan Programmes
in the Current Financial Year are as under :
Aid & Loan to Countries

3.1

Aid to Bhutan accounts for 58% of India’s total aid
budget. Other important destinations for Indian aid
programs include African Countries – 8%, Nepal –
5%, Sri Lanka – 1%, Bangladesh, Maldives and
Myanmar –1% and Other countries – 27%

3.2

The Government of India has extended loans to the
Governments of Bangladesh and Bhutan to assist in
the implementation of developmental projects.
During 2004-2005, the loans extended to the
Governments of Bangladesh and Bhutan amount to
Rs. 18.87 crores and Rs. 280.00 crores respectively.

4.

The Budget of the Ministry of External Affairs is
essentially a Non-Plan Budget. However, from 199697, a Plan head has been established with the
approval of the Cabinet. This primarily caters to
certain large developmental projects undertaken in
Bhutan, as part of project assistance requested by
Government of Bhutan in the Government of India’s
“Aid to Bhutan” Programme. The Tala Hydroelectric
Project currently under implementation in Bhutan
is a prestigious and important project. The other
projects being funded from the Plan head are the
Punatsangchu and the Dungsum Cement Plant, both
in Bhutan.

5.

The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters of
the Ministry of External Affairs during the current
financial year is Rs. 118.30 crores which forms about
3% of the total estimated revenue expenditure of
the Ministry. Estimated Expenditure on Indian
Missions and Posts abroad is expected to be of the
order of Rs. 896.26 crores which is about 25% of the
total revenue expenditure of the Ministry.

(In Rupees Crores)

Bhutan

768.65

Bangladesh

3.30

Nepal

66.17

Sri Lanka

15.30

Maldives

3.20

Myanmar

6.21

African Countries

106.84

Others ( Including
Developing Countries)

356.72

Principal Destinations of
India’s Aid Programmes
Aid to Others
25%

Aid to Maldives
less than 1%

Aid to Bhutan
55%

Aid to Myanmar
less than 1%

6.
Aid to Maldives
0%

Aid to Sri Lanka
2%

Aid to Bangladesh
4%
Aid to Nepal
5%

177

The Ministry of External Affairs’ revenue from
Passport and Visa fees and other receipts are likely
to be of the order of Rs. 1117.20 crores. It is
estimated that Passport fees would account for about
Rs. 520 crores, Visa fees Rs. 575 crores and other
receipts for Rs. 22.20 crores.

Appendix VIII
C & AG Report of Ministry of External Affairs

Avoidable loss due to delay in claiming refund of VAT:

Injudicious retention of vacant accommodation: The

Delay of HCI, London, in claiming refund of VAT paid
on renovation of the Embassy Residence from October

High Commission of India, Male retained the vacant
leased accommodation for two years from January 2001

1999 to May 2001 resulted in a loss of Rs. 2.44 crore.

to December, 2002, against the permissible period of
90 days, which resulted in injudicious expenditure of

(Para 2.1 of Report No. 2 of 2004)
Transaction Audit Observations

Rs. 39.71 lakh on payment of rent.
(Para 2.8 of Report No. 2 of 2004)

Avoidable expenditure on hiring of temporary

Transaction Audit Observations

accommodation for High Commissioner at London:
Hiring of temporary accommodation 47 weeks prior to

Delay in disposal of vacant property: Ministry of

the anticipated renovation of Embassy residence for
accommodating the High Commissioner of India resulted

External Affairs have delayed disposing a building in
Aden which fell vacant in March 1994 leading to

in avoidable expenditure of Rs. 1.71 crore.

deterioration of its condition. The Ministry also delayed
approval to the Mission’s proposal of leasing out the

(Para 2.2 of Report No. 2 of 2004)
Transaction Audit Observation

building resulting in a loss of Rs. 16.96 lakh to the
exchequer.

Undue benefit to officials of Embassy of India, Rome:

(Para 2.10 of Report No. 2 of 2004)
Transaction Audit Observations

Despite repeated audit observations, the Mission at Rome
made payment of inadmissible lunch and transportation
charges for children of India based staff which resulted
in unintended benefit of Rs. 79.26 lakh to the staff from

Irregular payment of gardener’s wages: The Embassy
of India, Muscat, made irregular reimbursement of Rs.

April 1998 to March 2003.

5.74 lakh on account of gardener’s wages to the Head
of Mission although the cost of garden maintenance

(Para 2.4 of Report No. 2 of 2004)
Transaction Audit Observations

was included in the rent of the Embassy residence and
the garden was actually maintained by the landlord.
(Para 2.13 of Report No. 2 of 2004)
Transaction Audit Observations

178

Appendix IX
Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India with other Countries
during the period January 2004 to March 2005
S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

MULTILATERAL
1

Social Charter of the SAARC.

2

The Additional Protocol to the SAARC
Regional Convention on
Suppression of Terrorism.

3
4

5
6
7

8

9

10

04.01.2004

04.01.2004

04.01.2004

04.01.2004

Agreement on South Asian Free
Trade Area (SAFTA)

04.01.2004

Intergovernmental Agreement on the
Asian Highway Network adopted at
Bangkok by the United Nations Economic
and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific

27.04.2004

WHO Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control.

10.09.2003

22.01.2004 (R) 05.02.2004

Framework Agreement between the
Mercosur and the Republic of India.

17.06.2003

01. 08.2003 (R)

Convention Abolishing the Requirement
of Legalization for Foreign Public
Documents, 1961

26. 10.2004 (A) 14.07.2005

(A) Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of Children in Armed Conflict; and(B)
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children,
Child Prostitution and Child Pornography.

15.11.2004

Framework Agreement on Economic
Cooperation between India and Member
States of the Cooperation Council for the
Arab States of the Gulf.

25.08.2004

Memorandum of Understanding between
the Governments of the Team-9 Countries
(Burkina Faso, Chad, Cote d’lvoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Guinea Bissau,
Mali, Senegal and India).

01.03.2004

11

C 108 Seafarers’ Identity Documents
Convention, 1958.

12

Convention on Nuclear Safety.

04.01.2004

01.03.2004
17.01.2005 (R)

20.09.1994

179

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

BILATERAL
AFGHANISTAN
1
Memorandum of Understanding on
Mutual Cooperation between the FSI of
the Ministry of External Affairs of the
Republic of India and the Institute of
Diplomacy of the Foreign Affairs Ministry
of the Transitional Islamic
State of Afghanistan.

1.9.2004

ARMENIA
2
Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Republic of Armenia for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments.

23.5.2003

13.8.2004

BAHRAIN
3
Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Kingdom of Bahrain for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments.

13.1.2004

6.8.2004

13.1.2004

21.10.2004

4

Extradition Treaty between the
Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain.

5

Agreement on Juridical and Judicial
Cooperation in Civil and Commercial
Matters ‘between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Kingdom of Bahrain.

6

Agreement on Mutual legal Assistance in
Criminal matters between the Government,
of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain.

BRAZIL
7
Co-operation Agreement in the field of
Tourism between the Government of the
Federative Republic of Brazil and the
Government of the Republic of India
8

27.1.2004

Framework Agreement between the
Government of the Federal Republic of
Brazil and the Government of the Republic
of India on Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space.

27.1.2004

180

1.9.2004

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

9

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Federative Republic of Brazil on
Exemption of visa requirement for holders
of Diplomatic and Official/
Service Passports.

27.1.2004

Cultural Exchange Programme between
the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Federative
Republic of Brazil for the Years 2004-2005.

27.1.2004

Programme of Cooperation between the
Indian Space Research Organisation and
the Brazilian Space Agency
for the year 2004.

27.1.2004

BULGARIA
Extradition Treaty between the Republic
of India and the Republic of Bulgaria

23.10.2003

Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of Bulgaria on
Cooperation in the field of
Youth Affairs & Sports

23.10.2003

23.10.2003

Memorandum of Understanding between
the Electronics and Compute Software
Export Promotion Council (ESC) and the
Bulgarian Association of
Information Technology (BAIT)

23.10.2003

23.10.2003

Memorandum of Understanding between
the Foreign Service Institute of the Ministry
of External Affairs, Republic of India and
the Diplomatic Institute of the Foreign
Ministry of the Republic of Bulgaria

28.7.2004

28.7.2004

CUBA
16 Memorandum of Understanding between
Indian Standards of the Republic of India and
the National Bureau of Standards of the
Republic of Cuba in the fields of standardisation
certification and information.

16.12.2003

16.12.2003

CZECH REPUBLIC
17 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Czech Republic on Defence Cooperation.

21.10.2003

10

11

12

13

14

15

181

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
18

Agreement between the European Community
and the Republic of India on Cooperation and
Mutual Administrative Assistance
on Customs Matters.

29.11.2003

FRANCE
19 Extradition Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the French Republic.
20

21

4.1.2003

Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
for establishing the Indo-French Institute
of Mathematics (IFIM)

25.9.2004

25.9.2004

Memorandum of Understanding between French
National Railways (SNCF) and Ministry of
Railways, Government of India

30.1.2004

31.1.2004

HUNGARY
22 Agreement between the Republic of India
and the Republic of Hungary for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments.
23

24

25

26

15.4.2004

3.11.2003

20.2.2004

Agreement between the Republic of India
and the Republic of Hungary for the
Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect
to Taxes on Income.

3.11.2003

Agreement between the Republic of India
and the Republic of Hungary on
Defence Cooperation

3.11.2003

Agreement between the Republic of India
and the Republic of Hungary on
Exemption of Visa Requirement for
Diplomatic and Official Passport Holders

3.11.2003

Memorandum of Understanding between
the Republic of India and the Republic of
Hungary on Cooperation in Information
Technology and Services

3.11.2003

3.11.2003

2.07.2004

2.7.2004

INDONESIA
27 Memorandum of Understanding between
the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of
Indonesia on Combating International Terrorism.

182

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

ISRAEL
28 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the State of Israel on Cooperation in the
field of Protection of the Environment.

9.9.2003

7.5.2004

29

IranAgreement on the Joint issue of
Stamps between the Republic of India and
the Islamic Republic of Iran.

July 2004

ITALY
30 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the ItalianRepublic on
Cooperation in the Fieldsof Science &Technology.

28.11.2003

KAZAKHASTAN
31 Memorandum of understanding between
the Ministry of Communication and Information
Technology of the republic of India and the
Ministry of Industry and Trade of the Republic
of Kazakhstan within the framework of the
Park of Information Technology.

15.9.2004

KOREA
32 Treaty on Extradition between the Republic
of India and the Republic of Korea

5.10.2004

33

Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters between the Republic of
India and the Republic of Korea

5.10.2004

KUWAIT
34 Extradition Treaty between the Republic of
India and the State of Kuwait
35

36

Date of Entry
into force

July 2004

7.5.2004

15.9.2004

4.11.2004

25.8.2004

Agreement between the Republic of India
and the State of Kuwait on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters

25.8.2004

Memorandum of Understanding of
Establishment of India-Kuwait Strategic
Consultative Group.

25.8.2004

LAO’S PDR
37 Agreement on Mutual Cooperation between
the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of Lao People’s
Democratic Republic on Drug Demand
Reduction and Prevention of Illicit Trafficking
in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
and Related Matters.

6.11.2002

183

25.8.2004

23.1.2004

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

MONGOLIA
38 Agreement on Cooperation in the field of
Animal Health and Dairy between the
Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of Mongolia.

15.1.2004

39

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Agreement for Cooperation in Space
Science, Technology and Applications
between, the Department of Space of the
Government of Republic of India and
the Ministry of Infrastructure of the
Government of Mongolia.

15.1.2004

15.1.2004

Protocol of Cooperation between the
Department of Biotechnology of the
Ministry of Science and Technology,
The Government of the Republic of India
and the Ministry of Education, Culture and
Science of the Government of Mongolia in
the field of Biotechnology.

15.1.2004

15.1.2004

MOROCCO
41 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Kingdom of Morocco relating to Air Services

7.12.2004

40

42

Memorandum of Understanding between
the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Kingdom of
Morocco for Cooperation in the field of
Agriculture Research and Education.

7.12.2004

7.12.2004

Memorandum of Understanding on
Cooperation in the field of Power between
the Republic of India and the
Kingdom of Morocco.

7.12.2004

7.12.2004

MOZAMBIQUE
44 Agreement on cooperation in the field of
Health and Medicine between the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare of the
Republic of India and the Ministry of the
Republic of Mozambique.

22.2.2004

22.2.2004

MYANMAR
Memorandum of Understanding of Cooperation
in the field of Railways between the Government
of India and the Government of the Union
of Myanmar.

27.7.2004

27.7.2004

43

184

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

NEPAL
46

Bilateral Cooperation Agreement between Bureau
of Indian Standards (BIS), India and Nepal Bureau
of Standards and Metrology (NBSM), Nepal

9.9.2004

9.9.2004

India-Nepal Rail Services Agreement

21.5.2004

21.5.2004

NORWAY
48 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Kingdom of Norway regarding the
Establishment of a Joint
Commission of Cooperation.

6.7.2004

6.7.2004

21.1.2001

21.1.2001

47

PAKISTAN
49

Agreement between India and Pakistan
on Rail Communication

PHILIPPINES
50 Extradition Treaty between the
Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the
Republic of Philippines.

12.3.2004

3.5.2004

POLAND
51 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Republic of Poland on Co-operation in
Combating Organized Crime and
International Terrorism.

17.2.2003

21.10.2004

ROMANIA
52 Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of Romania
for cooperation on Visa Free Regime for
Diplomatic Passport Holders

31.1.2004

53

54

55

31.1.2004

The Agreement between Government of
India and Government of Romania on
cooperation in Plant Protection and
Phytosanitary Quarantine Field

31.1.2004

Memorandum of Understanding between
the Romanian Television
and Doordarshan

31.1.2004

31.1.2004

Memorandum of Understanding
between the Romanian Broadcasting
and All India Radio

31.1.2004

31.1.2004

185

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
56 Agreement on Scientific and Technological
Cooperation between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Council of
Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro.

28.10.2004

57

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Tourism Agreement

SINGAPORE
58 Executive Programme on Cooperation in
the fields of Arts, Heritage, Archives and
Library between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Republic of Singapore for
the years 2004-2007.

19.10.2004

SLOVENIA
59 Convention between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Slovenia for the
Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
respect to Taxes on Income.

13.1.2003

SOUTH AFRICA
60 Memorandum of understanding between
the Government of the ‘Republic of South
Africa and the Government of the Republic
of India on Cooperation in the field of
Communications and
Information Technologies

15.9.2004

15.9.2004

SRI LANKA
61 Memorandum of Understanding on
Cooperation in the field of Tourism
between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the
Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka.

23.1.2004

23.1.2004

27.1.2004

27.1.2004

62

Memorandum of Understanding between
Ministry of Small Scale Industries,
Republic of India and Ministry of Industry,
Democratic Socialist Republic
of Sri Lanka.

SUDAN
63 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Republic of Sudan for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments.

2.10.2003

186

19.10.2004

30.8.2004

23.01.2004

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

SURINAME
64

Memorandum of Understanding between
India and Suriname on Cooperation in the
field of Agriculture

17.3.2003

SWITZERLAND
65 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Swiss Federal
Council on Cooperation in the fields of
Science and Technology.
66

Agreement between the Republic of India
and the Swiss Confederation on
Cooperation in the Event of Disasters.

10.11.2003

6.8.2004

10.11.2003

20.2.2004

SYRIA
67

Memorandum of Understanding between
India and Syria on Cooperation in the field
of Agriculture

15.11.2003

THAILAND
68 Treaty between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Kingdom of Thailand on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters.

8.2.2004

18.3.2004

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
69 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago on
the Inter-Governmental Commission on
Political, Economic, Scientific,
Technological and Cultural Cooperation.

5.2.2003

18.3.2004

UNITED KINGDOM
70 Memorandum of Understanding between
the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Kingdom on
the return of Illegal Immigrants.

30.1.2004

UKRAINE
71 Agreement between the Republic of India
and Ukraine on Mutual Protection of
Classified Information.

12.8.2003

07.4.2004

3.10.2002

26.5.2004

72

Extradition Treaty between the Republic
of India and Ukraine

187

30.1.2004

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

UZBEKISTAN
73 Memorandum of Understanding between
the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of
Uzbekistan for establishing Indo-Uzbek
Centre for Information Technology.

29.10.2004

VENEZUELA
74 Memorandum of Understanding between
the Foreign Services Institute of India and
the Foreign Service Institute of Venezuela

2.10.2004

YEMEN
75 Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of
the Republic of Yemen for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments.

30.10.2002

ZAMBIA
76 Memorandum of Understanding between India
and Zambia on Cooperation in the field of
Agriculture and Allied Sectors.

21.4.2003

188

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

29.10.2004

10.2.2004

10.2.2004

Appendix X
Instruments of Full Powers Issued during January 2004 - December 2004
S. No

Convention/Treaty

1

Full Powers in favour of Shri B.S. Minnas, Secretary (SSI), Ministry
of Small Scale Industries to sign the Memorandum of
Understanding between Ministry of Small Scale Industries,
Republic of India and Ministry of Industry, Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

13.01.2004

Full Powers in favour of Smt. Rathi Vinay Jha, Secretary,
Department of Tourism, Ministry of Tourism and Culture to
sign the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in the
field of Tourism between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka.

21.01.2004

Full Powers in favour of Shri Dipak Chatterjee, Commerce
Secretary, Department of Commerce to sign the Intergovernmental
Agreement on the Asian Highway Network adopted at Bangkok
by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific.

26.04.2004

Full Powers in favour of Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of State
(Independent Charge) for Science & Technology to sign the
Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation between
the Government of the Republic of India and the Council of
Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro.

24.09.2004

Full Powers in favour of Shri Himachal Som, Ambassador of
India to Italy to sign the Agreement between the Republic of
India and the Republic of San Marino for Elevation of Relations
from Consular to Diplomatic.

04.11.2004

Full Powers of Shri Nirupam Sen, Permanent Representative of
India to the United Nations and Authority to sign (a) Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict; and (b) Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography.

04.11.2004

2

3

4

5

6

Date of Full Powers

189

Appendix XI
Instruments of Ratification/Accession Issued during the Period January 2004 to December
2004
S. No

Instrument of Ratification/Accession

1

WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.

2

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments.

6.8.2004

Extradition Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the French Republic.

15.4.2004

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Republic of
Hungary for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

20.2.2004

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the State of Israel on Cooperation in
the field of Protection of the Environment.

7.5.2004

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Italian Republic on Cooperation in the Fields of
Science and Technology.

07.06.2004

3
4
5

6

7
8

9

10
11

12

13

Date of Issue of
Ratification/
Accession
22.1.2004

Extradition Treaty between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of Philippines.

3.5.2004

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of Sudan for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments.

23.1.2004

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Swiss Federal Council on Cooperation In the fields of
Science and Technology.

6.8.2004

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Swiss
Confederation on Cooperation in the Event of Disasters.

20.2.2004

Treaty between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the Kingdom of Thailand on Mutual Legal
Assistance In Criminal Matters.

18.3.2004

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
on the Inter-Governmental Commission on Political, Economic,
Scientific, Technological and Cultural Cooperation.

18.3.2004

Agreement between the Republic of India and Ukraine on
Mutual Protection of Classified Information.

7.4.200

14

Extradition Treaty between the Republic of India and Ukraine

26.5.2004

15

Convention between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of Slovenia for the
Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.

30.8.2004

190

Appendix XI

S. No

Instrument of Ratification/Accession

16

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of Armenia for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments.

30.8.2004

Agreement on Mutual Cooperation between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of Lao People’s
Democratic Republic on Drug Demand Reduction and
Prevention of Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances and Related Matters.

23.1.2004

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of Poland on Co-operation
in Combating Organised Crime and International Terrorism.

21.10.2004

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain on Juridical
and Judicial Cooperation in Civil and Commercial Matters for
the Service of Summons, Judicial Documents, Commissions,
Execution of Judgments and Arbitral Awards.

21.10.2004

17

18

19

20
21

Date of Issue of
Ratification/
Accession

Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance In Criminal Matters between
the Republic of India and the Republic of Korea
Treaty on Extradition between the Republic of India and the
Republic of Korea

4.11.2004
24.11.2004

22

Extradition Treaty between the Republic of India and the State of Kuwait

9.12.2004

23

Agreement between the Republic of India and the State of
Kuwait on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters

3.12.2004

24

25

Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance and the Recognition
and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil Matters between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of French Republic

07.12.2004

Treaty between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of South Africa on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters

07.12.2004

26

C 108 Seafarers’ Identity Documents Convention, 1958

10.1.2005

27

The Convention on Nuclear Safety

17.1.2005

28

Agreement on Cultural Cooperation between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of Italy

20.1.2005

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Kingdom of Morocco regarding Merchant Shipping and
Related Maritime Matters

20.1.2005

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Kingdom of Morocco regarding Merchant Shipping
and Related Maritime Matters

23.1.2005

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Kingdom of Bahrain
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters

23.1.2005

29

30

31

191

Appendix XII
Conferences/Seminars/Meetings/ Study projects organised/undertaken by Institutions/
NGOs which were partly funded by Policy Planning & Research Division
A. Expenditure already incurred during 2004-05
Sl.No.

Event

Institution

1.

A Commemorative conference in 2007 of
the first Asian Relations Conference of
March 1947
File No. F(ii)12(12)/2004

Association for Asian
Union

To undertake specific projects such as
holding international conferences,
publishing and printing original research
work, organizing lectures etc.
File No. F(ii)12(16)/2004

Centre for Indian Studies,
Beijing University

5,00,000/-

Project “US Policy towards Muslim
countries”
File No. F(ii)12(16)/2004

ORF Institute of Asian Studies,
New Delhi

3,00,000/-

2.

3.

4.

5.

Proposal from Indian Association of West
Indian Association of West &
& Central Asian Studies, (Amb.M.H.Ansari)Central Asian Studies.
to organize lectures and research
meetings on West & C. Asia.
File No. F(ii)12(9)/2004

Amount (Rs.)

56,520/-

1,50,000/-

Publishing in book form the proceedings
of the International seminar on
“Nationalism, Transnationalism and
Indian Diaspora” organized by them
during 27-29 January, 2004
F(ii)12(21)/2004

Centre for Indian Diaspora &
Cultural Studies, Hemchandracharya
North Gujarat University, Patan.

37,500/-

6.

Publication of proceedings of V Int’l
conference on “Hispanism & Luso-Brazilian
Studies, Flashback from the present”
(Balance Payment)
File No. F(ii)12(68)/2003

Centre of Spanish Studies, JNU

16,680/-

7.

7th Asian Regional Seminar on Peaceful
Uses of Atomic Energy (Balance Payment)
File No. F(ii)12(54)/2002

United Schools International,
New Delhi

12,500/-

To participate in the 2nd India-Serbia &
Montenegro dialogue at Belgrade in
June 2004.
File No. F(ii)12(33)/2004

Centre for Policy Research,
New Delhi

Academic trip of Dr. Adesh Pal to
Australia & Fiji
File No. F(ii)12(38)/2004

Hemchandracharya North Gujarat
University, Patan

8.

9.

192

1,39,500/-

41,380/-

Appendix XII

Sl. No.

Event

Institution

12.

Participation in a joint seminar on the
theme of broader politico-economic
trends in Asia (Balance Payment)
File No. F(ii)12(54)/2003

Centre for Strategic & Int’l Studies,
New Delhi

13.

Project “Preparation of reports on three
human rights conventions”
F(ii)12(25)/2004

ISIL, New Delhi

14.

Reimbursement of expenditure incurred
on seminar “Central Asia in Transition:
Dynamics of Political, social & economic
development” in March 2004
File No. F(ii)12(73)/2003

University of Mumbai.

50,000/-

15.

Hosting India-US exchange of Military
Law, March 1-3, 2004
File No. F(ii)12(19)/2004

United Services Institution of
India, New Delhi

18,215/-

Participation in joint seminar on theme of
“Broader politico-economic trends in
Asia”
File No. F(ii)12(54)/2003

Centre for Strategic and International
Studies, New Delhi

75,285/-

17.

Ethnic Conflict in Fiji: Challenges of
assimilation before Indian diaspora
File No. F(ii)12(61)/2003

Dr. Amba Pande, JNU

18.

Conducting next round of Track-II
dialogue with Pakistani counterpart.
File No. F(ii)12(8)/98

India-Pakistan Neemrana Initiative,
New Delhi

2,60,385/-

Conducting next round of Track-II
dialogue with Pakistani counterpart.
File No. F(ii)12(8)/98

India-Pakistan Neemrana Initiative,
New Delhi

33,487/-

India-Australia Joint Study for drawing
up a road map for strategic partnership
File No. F(ii)12(35)/2003

Dr. C. Raja Mohan, Professor,
Centre for South Asian Studies, JNU

12,500/-

Publishing the proceedings of the V
International Conference on “Hispanism
and Luso-Brazilian Studies: Flashback from
the Present”
(Final Payment)F(ii)12(68)/2003

Centre of Spanish Studies,
School of Language, Literature &
Culture Studies, JNU

16,780/-

Seminar on “Domestic Turmoil in South
Asia Implications for India’s Security &
Foreign Policy” in March, 2004 and
publishing a monograph.
(Final Payment)File No. F(ii)12(36)/2003

School of International Studies,
Pondicherry University, Pondicherry

25,750/-

16.

19.

20.

21.

22.

193

Amount (Rs.)

75,285/-

4,11,400/-

3,966/-

Appendix XII
S. No.

Event

Institution

23.

Seminar on “the challenges to India’s
foreign policy in the new era”
in October, 2004 (75%)
File No. F(ii)12(15)/2004

H.N.B. Garhwal University,
Srinagar, Uttaranchal

56,250/-

Participate in the Second Canada-India
Dialogue at Vancouver in March, 2004
(Final Payment)File No. F(ii)12(4)/2004

Centre for Policy Research,
New Delhi

48,200/-

25.

Seminar on “India-Pakistan Relations in
the Pursuit of Peace” in March, 2004
(Final Payment)File No. F(ii)12(78)/2003

Vidya Prasarak Mandal, Mumbai

26.

International seminar on Fyodor I.
Tyutchev’s Bicentennial “Traditions of
Philosophical Poetry in Russian and
Indian Literature” during
5-7 November, 2003
(Final Payment)File No. F(ii)12(44)/2003

Centre of Russian Studies, JNU

24.

Total

Amount (Rs.)

1,14,592/-

9,120/-

24,65,025

B. Balance amount to be released for projects already sanctioned
Sl.No.

Event

Institution

1.

Hosting 2nd dialogue with delegation
from ship and ocean foundation, Tokyo

Society for Indian Ocean Studies,
N.Delhi

2.

Amount (Rs.)

73,000/-

Preparation of reports on three human
rights conventions
Fee including airfares to expert for
evaluation of reports

ISIL, New Delhi

3.

Project “China and South Asia :
Bangladesh-China relations” by
Dr.Shyamali Ghosh

IDSA, New Delhi

1,77,480/-

4.

Preparation of study report in connection
with India-Australia Joint study for
drawing up a road map for
strategic partnership

Dr.C.Raja Mohan

12,500/-

5.

Project “India’s Nuclear Diplomacy after
Pokhran-II : its government and
public face.

ORF Institute of Security Studies,
New Delhi

Seminar “Domestic turmoil in South Asia:
Implications for India’s security and
foreign policy “

Pondicherry University

6.

194

4,11,400/+ 1,25,000/5,36,000/-

2,95,000/-

26,000/-

Appendix XII

Sl.No.

Event

Institution

Amount (Rs.)

7.

Seminar “India and the emerging Asia”

JNU, New Delhi

65,000/-

8.

Seminar “Hydroind-2004”

National Hydrographic Office,
Dehradun

50,000/48,200/-

9.

Second Canada-India Dialogue

CPR, New Delhi

10.

Project “Reshaping the discourse on
Pakistan-occupied Kashmir”

Centre for Strategic and
Regional Studies, Univ. of Jammu

Conference “Bio-terrorism and
bio-defence”

Institute of Peace and Conflict
Studies, New Delhi

25,000/-

12.

Second round of Track-II IndiaSri Lanka dialogue

IIC, New Delhi

61,600/-

13.

To undertake specific projects such as
holding international conferences,
publishing and printing original
research work, organizing lectures etc.

Centre for Indian Studies,
Beijing University

14.

Track-II dialogue with Development
Research Centre of the State
Council of China

RIS, New Delhi

60,000/-

15.

Seminar “India and the new Europe”

Association of Indian Diplomats,
New Delhi

15,500/-

11.

5,00,000/-

5,00,000/-

16.

India-Yugoslavia dialogue

CPR, New Delhi

40,000/-

17.

Seminar “Fyodor I.Tyutchev’s
bicentennial : Traditions of philosophical
poetry in Russian & Indian Literature

JNU, New Delhi

18,750/-

18.

Project “Central Asia’s Security concerns :
Implications for India”

Centre for Russian, C.Asian &
East European Studies, JNU

37,500/-

19.

Bringing out a publication containing
select articles on international law

ISIL, New Delhi

12,500/-

20.

Project “ Reasons behind Anti-US feelings
in the Arab world and how this
can be exploited by India…..”

Dr. Manjushree Singh

21.

Seminar “language, Traditions & Society
in mid-West & Central Asian countries

Panjab University

30,000/-

22.

Project “Iran 25 years after the revolution
as reflected in literature, art & films”

ORF Instt. of Asian Studies
New Delhi

37,500/-

Project “Pvt.Int’l Law issues
affecting NRIs”

ISIL, New Delhi

6,00,000/-

Total

27,26,530

23.

195

5,000/-

Appendix XIII
Expenditure Statement for the period April 2004-January 2005
(ITEC & SCAAP Programmes)

Major/Minor
Accounts

Total No. of Slots
Allotted in
2004-2005

Total No. of
Trainees as on
18.02.2005

Expenditure
Incurred up
to 31.01.2005

Budget Heads
of Grant
2004-2005

Major Head-3605,
17-ITEC Programme,
17.00.32-Contribution

2826

1819

34.84 crore

BE 30 crore
RE 45 crore

Major Head-3605,
19-SCAAP Programme,
19.00.32-Contribution

716

494

4.02 crore

5.5 crore

Total

3542

2313

38.86 crore

BE 35.5 crore
RE 50.5 crore

196

Appendix XIV
List of Institutes offering ‘B’ and ‘C’ Category Courses to Foreign Nominees under ITEC/
SCAAP Schemes (2004-2005)
S. No

Name of Institute

City/State

1

Administrative Staff College of India

Hyderabad

2

Aptech Limited.

3

Bureau of Indian Standards

New Delhi

4

Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training

New Delhi

5

Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute

6

Central Food Technological Research Institute

7

Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages

Hyderabad

8

Central Institute of Tool Design

Hyderabad

9

Central Poultry Training Institute

Karnataka

10

Central Scientific Instruments Organisation

New Delhi

11

Centre For Development of Advanced Computing

12

CMC Ltd.

New Delhi

13

Comptroller and Auditor General of India

New Delhi

14

Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India

15

Fluid Control Reseach Institiute

16

Human Settlement Management Institute

New Delhi

17

Indian Institute of Mass Communication

New Delhi

18

Indian Institute of Production Management

19

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing

Dehradun

20

Institute of Applied Manpower Research

New Delhi

21

Institute Of Government Accounts & Finance

New Delhi

22

Institute of Secretariat Training & Management

New Delhi

23

International Management Institute

New Delhi

24

International Statistical Education Centre

Kolkata

25

JIS College of Engineering

Kolkata

26

Narula Instittute of Technology

Kolkata

27

National Crime Records Bureau

New Delhi

28

National Institute of Bank Management

29

National Institute of Educational Planning & Administration

30

National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development

Mumbai

Haryana
Mysore

Mohali(Chandigarh)

Gujarat
Kerala

Orissa

Pune

197

New Delhi
Noida

Appendix XIV

S. No

Name Of Institute

City/State

31

National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research

32

National Institute of Rural Development

Hyderabad

33

National Institute of Small Industry Extension Training

Hyderabad

34

NIIT Limited

New Delhi

35

Postal Training Centre

Karnataka

36

Research & Information System for the
Non-aligned and Other Developing Countries

New Delhi

Punjab

37

RITES

Haryana

38

SIBIT

New Delhi

39

South India Textile Research Association

40

TATA Infotech

41

Technical Teachers’ Training Institute

42

V.V. Giri National Labour Institute

43

Water Resource Development Training Centre

Coimbatore
New Delhi
Chennai
Uttar Pradesh

198

Roorkee

Appendix XV
Allocation and utilisation of Civilian Training Slots under ITEC and SCAAP (2004-05)

Country

Slots

Total
Joined

Total
Joined

100

102

80

Algeria

12

9

9

Angola

21

16

3

Country

Slots

Total
Joined

Total
Joined

Estonia

25

24

19

Ethiopia

30

46

27

Fiji

30

29

13

Georgia

35

33

23

ITEC
Afghanistan

Antiguan
Beramuda

7

7

3

Grenada

5

7

5

Argentina

3

3

1

Guyana

35

51

35

Armenia

60

86

63

Honduras

7

3

2

Azerbaijan

10

9

6

Hungary

2

2

1

Bangladesh

120

108

56

Indonesia

88

119

71

10

12

10

Iran

15

18

13

Belize

7

10

6

Iraq

125

121

78

40

56

34

Benin

10

4

3

5

8

4

Bhutan

80

43

32

60

41

27

Bolivia

03

1

0

2

2

1

Bosnia

2

1

0

Korea(DPRK)

10

10

6

Brunei Darussalam

10

1

0

Kyrgyzstan

65

50

38

Bulgaria

10

17

5

Laos

60

74

42

Burundi

5

1

0

Latvia

4

4

3

Cambodia

60

67

47

Lebanon

2

3

2

Colombia

20

21

13

Liberia

10

2

2

Commonwealth
of Dominica

Lithuania

10

7

6

5

4

1

Macedonia

04

-0

0

Costa Rica

7

4

3

Madagascar

15

9

4

Cuba

38

38

36

Malaysia

23

10

7

Djibouti

10

0

0

Maldives

20

33

19

5

1

1

Mali

03

1

1

20

6

2

Mauritania

2

2

1

5

4

2

Mexico

13

15

5

13

13

9

Moldova

2

1

1

7

9

9

Mongolia

50

34

29

05

5

4

Morocco

05

5

2

Belarus

Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El-Salvador
Eritrea

Ivory Coast
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kiribati

199

Appendix XV

Country

Slots

Total
Joined

Total
Joined

109

113

77

Vanuatu

5

2

0

Venezuela

5

5

5

100

144

90

30

31

25

2821

1819

Country

Slots

Total
Joined

Total
Joined

Myanmar

130

134

101

80

30

24

7

5

3

Oman

55

70

53

Palau

2

1

1

Yemen

Palestine

30

55

19

Total

Panama

15

15

10

SCAAP

Papua New Guinea

10

29

9

Paraguay

2

3

2

Peru

8

6

6

Philippines

35

46

16

Poland

03

4

3

2

2

0

10

13

9

100

123

Rwanda

10

Senegal

Nepal
Nicaragua

Uzbekistan

Vietnam

Botswana

25

20

18

Burkino Fasso

10

2

2

Cameroon

05

4

3

5

0

0

Gabon

05

6

1

Gambia

10

10

4

77

Ghana

60

80

55

4

0

Kenya

53

69

48

20

14

10

Lesotho

30

19

16

Slovak Republic

5

7

4

Malawi

05

11

3

Solomon Island

7

6

2

Mauritius

40

49

31

120

93

75

Mozambique

20

50

17

Sudan

70

120

52

Namibia

50

48

38

Suriname

20

20

14

Niger

5

1

0

Syria

40

37

30

Nigeria

53

58

29

Tajikistan

100

43

30

Seychelles

20

22

18

Thailand

90

53

39

Sierra Leone

15

9

8

Togo

02

2

2

Tonga

10

6

6

South Africa

100

93

64

Trinidad & Tabago

20

19

9

Swaziland

05

4

0

Tunisia

10

7

5

Tanzania

75

73

54

Turkey

50

76

40

Uganda

30

32

23

Turkmenistan

32

36

32

Zambia

45

31

23

Ukraine

10

13

8

Zimbabwe

50

67

39

Uruguay

5

12

6

Total

758

494

Republic Of Sao Tome
Romania
Russia

Sri Lanka

Comoros

200

Appendix XVI
Military Training Slots Allotted to various Countries during the period April-November 2004
under ITEC/SAP
S.No

Country

Army

Navy

Air Force

DSSC

NDC

Total

Under ITEC/SAP
1

Bangladesh

6

19

5

0

1

31

2

Bhutan

0

0

0

1

1

2

3

Botswana

3

0

0

0

0

3

4

Cambodia

3

2

4

0

0

9

5

Egypt

0

0

0

0

1

1

6

Ethiopia

0

0

0

1

0

1

7

Ghana

3

2

1

0

0

6

8

Indonesia

2

3

4

0

1

10

9

Kazakhstan

4

0

0

1

0

5

10

Kenya

3

3

0

0

0

6

11

Kyrgyzstan

4

0

0

0

0

4

12

Lao

2

0

4

0

0

6

13

Lesotho

3

0

0

0

0

3

14

Malaysia

2

3

3

0

0

8

15

Maldives

0

0

0

0

1

1

16

Mauritius

14

9

5

0

0

28

17

Mongolia

3

0

0

1

0

4

18

Myanmar

19

3

2

1

1

26

19

Nepal

0

0

0

2

1

3

20

Nigeria

3

4

2

0

0

9

21

Seychelles

4

5

0

1

0

10

22

Sri Lanka

0

0

0

3

2

5

23

Syria

0

0

0

1

1

2

24

Sudan

0

0

0

1

0

1

25

Tajikistan

6

0

0

0

0

6

26

Tanzania

3

2

0

1

0

6

27

Thailand

0

0

0

0

1

1

28

Uganda

3

0

0

0

0

3

29

Uzbekistan

2

0

0

0

1

3

30

Vietnam

10

4

0

0

1

15

Total

102

59

30

14

13

218

201

Appendix XVI

S.No

Country

Army

Navy

Air Force

DSSC

NDC

Total

Under SFS
1

Australia

0

0

0

1

0

1

2

Botswana

22

0

14

1

0

37

3

Chile

0

0

0

0

1

1

4

France

3

0

0

0

1

4

5

Germany

0

0

0

0

1

1

6

Iran

0

1

0

0

0

1

7

Kenya

0

0

6

0

0

6

8

Kuwait

0

1

0

0

0

1

9

Japan

0

0

0

1

0

1

10

Malaysia

1

1

0

1

1

4

11

Nigeria

3

20

0

1

1

25

12

ROK

0

0

0

1

0

1

13

Singapore

0

1

0

1

1

3

14

South Africa

0

2

0

1

0

3

Total

29

26

20

8

6

89

Reciprocal
1

Bangladesh

0

0

0

3

0

3

2

UK

0

0

0

3

1

4

3

US

0

0

0

2

1

3

Total

0

0

0

8

2

10

202

Appendix XVII
List of ITEC Experts presently stationed (November 2004)
S.No.

Country

Name

Field

1

Laos

Major Ashok Jha

2

3

4

5

6

Laos

Zambia

Zambia

Zambia

Zambia

From

To

Teaching English
& Armytactics

19.9.2001

December 2004

Major Sandeep
Nautiyal

Teaching English
& Army tactics

19.9.2001

December 2004

Col. UK Gurung

Indian Military
Advisory Team
[IMAT]

3.1.2004

2.1.2006

Indian Military
Advisory Team
[IMAT]

3.1.2004

2.1.2006

Indian Military
Advisory Team
[IMAT]

3.1.2004

2.1.2006

Indian Military
Advisory Team
[IMAT]

3.1.2004

2.1.2006

Lt.Col. Raghu
Srinivasan

Lt.Col. Raghu
Srinivasan

Wing Cdr. V. R.
Choudhary

7

Guyana

Dr. V. C. Mathur

Group Planning

8

Guyana

Sh. C. D. Banerjee

Digital Technology

9

Seychelles

Cdr. P. Pokhariyal

Naval Advisor

10

Jamaica

Sh. K.K. Tiwari

Foundry Expert

11

Namibia

Sh. R.K. Dubey

Lecturer in
Mathematics

12

13

Laos

Laos

1.1.2005
1.9.2002

31.8.2005

January 2003

January 2005

11.2.2002

10.6.2005

1.3.2003

1.3.2005

Lt.Col.Vivek
Sharma

English Language
Teacher

March 2003

March 2006

Major S.S. Maini

English Language
Teacher

April 2003

April 2006

14

Jamaica

Sh. K. Mohan

Dairy farming

May 2003

May 2005

15

Guyana

Dr. R.P.S. Kharb

Veg. Seed Expert

June 2003

June 2005

16

Guyana

Dr. A. Murugan

Milk Marketing

July 2003

July 2006

17

Guyana

Sh. Mukul Gupta

Town Planner

August 2003

August 2005

18

Mauritius

Sh. A.K. Gupta

Architect

July 2003

July 2005

19

Lesotho

Major Sanjay Kr.
Maurya

Surgical Specialist
August 2003

August 2005

203

Appendix XVII

S.No.

Country

Name

Field

20

Lesotho

Major A.K. Gupta

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

Lesotho

Lesotho

Lesotho

Lesotho

Lesotho

From

To

Indian Army
Training Team

August 2003

August 2005

Indian Army
Training Team

August 2003

August 2005

Major Neeraj
Gossain

Indian Army
Training Team

August 2003

August 2005

Major Prabhat
Gidda

Indian Army
Training Team

August 2003

August 2005

Major Vijay Manral

Indian Army
Training Team

August 2003

August 2005

Indian Army
Training Team

September 2003

September 2005

Indian Army
Training Team

September 2003

September 2005

Major Pawan Dhull

Major Sanjay Mohla

Lesotho-Iind
Batch

Major J. S. Minhas

Lesotho

Major Harpreet
Singh

Indian Army
Training Team

September 2003

September 2005

Major N.K. Ohri

Indian Army
Training Team

September 2003

September 2005

Foreign Trade
Expert

October 2003

January 2005

Lesotho

Ethiopia

Shri J. M. Gupta

30

Seychelles

Lt.Col. LVR Singh

Military Adviser

October 2003

October 2005

31

Lesotho

Brig. Padam
Budhwar

Security Adviser,
IATT

November 2003

February 2005

32

Seychelles

Dr. Jagat Ram

Eye Specialist

November 2003

November 2005

33

Guyana

Sh. C.H. Ranga Rao

TV Transmission
Engg.

December 2003

December 2005

Indian Army
Training Team

December 2003

August 2005

Indian Army
Training Team

December 2003

August 2005

Indian Army
Training Team

December 2003

August 2005

Indian Army
Training Team

December 2003

August 2005

Indian Army
Training Team

December 2003

August 2005

34

35

36

37

38

Lesotho

Lesotho

Lesotho

Lesotho

Lesotho

CHM Laxma Reddy

CHM B. Devrai

HAV Bidhan Mech

CHM Simon K. John

HAV A.K. Bharti

204

Appendix XVII

S.No.

Country

Name

Field

From

To

39

Mauritius

Sh. K.P. Singh

Quantity Surveyor

26 August 2004

August 2005

40

Mauritius

Sh. P. K. Singh

Quantity Surveyor

26 August 2004

August 2005

41

Mauritius

Sh. Deepak Thakur

Quantity Surveyor

26 August 2004

August 2005

42

Mauritius

Sh. N.K. Singh

Civil Engineer

26 August 2004

August 2005

43

Mauritius

Sh. A. K. Rastogi

Civil Engineer

September 2004

September 2005

44

Mauritius

Sh. Rakesh Singhal

Trainer for
bureaucrats

July 2004

July 2005

Mrs. Nandita
Hazarika

Trainer for
bureaucrats

July 2004

July 2005

Mrs.
Sethuramalingham

Trainer for
bureaucrats

August 2004

August 2005

45

46

Mauritius

Mauritius

47

Mauritius

Sh. Rajesh Kumar

Architect

November 2004

November 2005

48

Mauritius

Sh. P.S. Negi

Architect

November 2004

November 2005

49

Mauritius

Sh. Rajesh K.
Kaushal

Architect

November 2004

November 2005

50

Mauritius

Sh. B.K.
Chakravarty

Architect

November 2004

November 2005

205

Appendix XVIII
Aid for Disaster Relief
Supplies of Pharmaceuticals were the main items of disaster Relief to Least Developed
Countries during 2004-05
Sl.No. Name of the countries

Items

1

4 countries of the Central America
El Salvador, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Belize

Supply of medicines

2

DPRK

Donation of 1,000 metric
tonnes of wheat, rice

3

Suriname

Amount in Rupees
Rs. 14,46,10.71

Rs.1,67,10,000.00

Supply of HIV/Aids,
medicines supply pf vaccines,
insecticides, nets

Rs.43,00,000.00

4

Jamaica

-

Rs.90,00,000.00

5

Grenada

Supply of medicines

Rs.22,50,000.00

6

Haiti

Supply of medicines

Rs.4,50,000.00

7

Dominican Republic

Supply of medicines

Rs.22,50,000.00

8

Bahamas

Supply of medicines

Rs.22,50,000.00

Total

Rs.373.54 lakhs

Total Budget Grant for ADR during 2004-05 is Rs. 5.1 crore

Appendix XIX
Gender-Related Statistics
Cadre

Total
Strength

No. of lady
officers

As % of the total
strength

IFS

618

80

13%

IFS-B

2674

359

13%

L&T

15

2

13%

Interpreters

33

6

18%

Library Cadre

14

3

21%

206

Appendix XX
Seminars/Conferences/Round Tables Talks Organised by ICWA from April 2004
No. Date

Topic

Participants

1.

23 April 2004

Seminar on : “The Future of
Trans-Atlantic Relations”
Former Foreign Secretary.

Amb. V.K. Grover, Prof. Balveer Arora, JNU,
Prof. Varun Sahni, JNU, Shri M.K. Rasgotra,

2.

5 May 2004

Seminar on: “Latin American
Integration and India”

H.E. Mr. Jorge Heine, Amb. of Chile, Prof.
R. Narayanan, JNU, Prof. Abdul Nafey, JNU,
Prof. R.L. Chawla, JNU, Amb. M.P.M. Menon.

3.

7 May 2004

Seminar on: “China: A
Growing Power in South
East Asia”

Prof. Manoranjan Mohanty, ICS, Prof.Swaran
Singh, JNU, Shri Sujit Dutta, IDSA,
Dr. G.V.C. Naidu, IDSA. Amb.A.N.Ram.

4.

2 June 2004

Lecture on: “Third Africa
Day”

Shri.Shashank, Foreign Secretary, H.E. Mrs.
M.E. Nkoana- Mashabane, High Commissioner
of the Republic of South Africa, H.E. Maj. Gen.
Charles Dickson Ndaxu P. Namoloh, High
Commissioner of the Republic of Namibia.

5.

15 June 2004

Consultative Meeting:
“Panchsheel and the
Contemporary World”.

Amb. C.V. Ranganathan

6.

13 July 2004

Lecture On: “Religion and
State Formation in West Asia”.

Prof. David S.Thomas (USA),
Amb. S.K. Bhutani

7.

28 July 2004

Seminar on: “Elections in
Indonesia”

Dr. Shankari Sundararaman, JNU, Dr. G.V.C.
Naidu, IDSA, Dr. Udai Bhanu Singh, IDSA, Prof.
S. D. Muni, JNU,

8.

10 September
2004

Lecture On: “NEPAD Team 9:
Relations between India
and Africa”.

H.E. Dr. Cheikh Tidiane Gadio, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Republic of Senegal,
Shri Shashank, Former Foreign Secretary.

9.

24 September
2004

Meeting with the delegation
from Karachi Council of
Foreign Relations, Economic
Affairs & Law (KCFREAL)
Pakistan

Participants from Pakistan: Chief Justice (Retd.)
Saeed uz Zaman Siddiqui, Mr. Mansoor Alam,
Mr. Liaqat Merchant, Dr. A.S.Nasir, Dr.(Ms.)
Shaheen Salahuddin, Mrs.Merchant, Mr.
Ahsan Mukhtar Zubairi, Mr.Salahuddin Ahmed.
Participants from India: Dr. Syeda Hameed,
Justice A.M.Ahmadi, Amb. S.K.Singh, Shri
Salman Haider, Amb. Mohammad Hamid Ansari,
Shri Inder Malhotra, Prof.Suresh Sharma, Shri
Siddharth Varadarajan, Ms. Monika Mohta
Ms.Subha Rajan.

10. 29 September
2004

Lecture On: “Nuclear Issue
and Japan”.

H.E. Mr. Yasakuni Enoki, Ambassador of Japan,
Amb. Arjun Asrani.

11. 13 October
2004

Seminar on: “Cooperation in
Combating Terrorism in the
Bay of Bengal (BIMSTEC)
Regions: Challenges and
Prospects”.

Prof. S.D.Muni, JNU, Dr.Manoj Joshi, HT, Prof.
P.V.Rao, Osmania University, Hyderabad, Rear
Admiral Raja Menon, USII, Dr. Manmohini Kaul,
JNU, Amb. A. N. Ram

12. 16 November
2004

Lecture On: “Romania on its
way to European Union”.

His Highness Prince Radu of HohenzollernVeringen, Romania.

207

Appendix XX

No. Date

Topic

Participants

13. 18 November
2004

International Seminar on:
“50 Years of Panchsheel:
Towards A New International
Order Based on Genuine
Multilateralism”.

Shri. K.Natwar Singh, External Affairs Minister,
delivered the Keynote Address. Invited overseas
dignitaries included: Shri. C. M. Bhandari,
AS(PP&R), MEA, Mrs. Julea Dolly Joner, African
Union, Prof. Maria Renee Cura Chivilcoy,
Argentina, Mr.Liu Shuqing, China, Mr. Jia Zhijie,
China, Dr. Andras Balogh, Hungary, Mr. Sabam
Siagian, Indonesia, Mr. Nyunt Tin, Myanmar, Dr.
B.B. Thapa, Nepal, Dr. Mubashir Hasan, Pakistan,
Prof. Maria Krzysztof Byrski, Poland, Dr. Kishore
Mahbubani, Singapore, Ms. Elizabeth
Sidiropoulos, South Africa, Prof. Kusuma
Snitwongse, Thailand.

14. 19-20
November
2004

International Seminar on:
“Emerging Trends in IndoAfrican Relations”

Shri. Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister
of State External Affairs delivered the Keynote
Address.

15. 24 November
2004

Seminar on: “From Bali to
Vientiane: Road Map for IndiaASEAN Partnership”.

Prof. S.D.Muni, JNU, Prof.C.Raja
Mohan, JNU, Dr.Nagesh Kumar,
RIS, Amb.A.N.Ram

16. 2 December
2004

Lecture on “India, EU and
Germany: a two-laned
Strategic Partnership”

H.E. Mr. Heimo Richter, Ambassador of the
Federal Republic of Germany, Amb. S.K. Lambah

17. 6 December
2004

Function to commemorate the
“International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People”

Shri Rajiv Sikri, Secretary(East), MEA, Amb.
Gharekhan, Amb. Ms. Dhabiya Khamis, Chief
Representative, League of Arab States Mission,
H.E. Mr. Elyes Kasri, Ambassador of the Republic
of Tunisia, H.E. Mr. Osama Musa, Ambassador of
the State of Palestine

18. 21 December
2004

Seminar on “Security and
Political Situation in Iraq”

Shri E. Ahamed, Hon’ble Minister of State for
External Affairs, Amb. S.K. Bhutani, Prof. Hari
Vasudevan, JMI, Shri Talmiz Ahmad, AS, MEA,
Prof. Shri Prakash, JMI, Amb. M.H. Ansari, Shri
Satish Jacob, Prof. C. Raja Mohan, JNU, Amb.
Ranjit Gupta, Dr. Arshi Khan, Hamdard
University

19. 28 December
2004

Lecture on “Economic
Diplomacy in Postmodern
Times: The need to manage
interfaces between government,
business and NGOs”

Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for External
Affairs, Dr. Raymond Saner of Centre for Socio
Economic Development(CSEND), Geneva

20. 30 December
2004

Panel Discussion on Report
of the UNSG’S High Level
Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change

Shri Shyam Saran, Foreign Secretary, Lt. Gen.
Satish Nambiar, Director, USI, Amb. Vijay
Nambiar, Amb. Muchkund Dubey, Commodore
C. Uday Bhaskar, Officiating Director, IDSA, Shri
Dileep Padgaonkar, Consulting Editor, The Times
of India

208

Appendix XXI
Select Conferences/Workshops/Seminars Organised by RIS
Seminar on TRIPs Regime and Access to Essential
Medicines, New Delhi, 3 December 2004.

RIS/IUCN/CII International Conference on
Biotechnology for Asian Development; New
Delhi, 7-8 April 2004.
SACEPS/CPD/RIS Seminar on Follow-up of
SAARC Summit Decisions and Launch of the
South Asia Development and Cooperation Report
2004, Dhaka, 18 May 2004.
Seminar on the Agenda of UNCTAD XI, New
Delhi, 4 June 2004.

Seminar on National Innovation System:
Experience of Select Asian Countries, New Delhi,
14 January 2005.
RIS Publications
Books
Towards an Asian Economic Community: Vision of a
New Asia, 2004 by Nagesh Kumar (ed) and
published jointly with Institute of Southeast Asian
Studies (ISEAS), Singapore.

Technical Seminar on Short-term Forecasting of
India’s Exports: Methodological Issues, New
Delhi, 6 July 2004.

Food Safety Regulation Concerns and Trade: The
Developing Country Perspective, by Rajesh Mehta
and J. George (eds.), 2005, New Delhi:
Macmillans.

Seminar on Effects of Trade Openness on
Productivity in Manufacturing Industries: A Cost
Function Approach, New Delhi, 7 July 2004.
Seminar on WTO’s July Framework, New Delhi,
6 August 2004.

ASEAN-India Vision 2020: Working Together for a
Shared Prosperity by RIS and ASEAN-India
Network of Think-Thanks, 2004.

RIS/DSIR National Workshop on Strategic
Approach to Strengthening International
Competitiveness in Knowledge-based industries,
New Delhi, 13 August 2004.

Future Directions of BIMSTEC: Towards a Bay of
Bengal Economic Community by RIS in consultation
with IPS, Colombo; ITD, Bangkok; and CPD,
Dhaka, 2004.

PIDE/RIS Seminar on South Asia Development and
Cooperation Report 2004, Islamabad, 18 August
2004.

WTO Negotiations and Indian Small Scale Industry
by Rajesh Mehta and Pooja Agarwal. Published
jointly with Federation of Indian Micro and Small
& Medium Enterprises (FISME) and Office of
Development Commissioner (SSI), Ministry of
Small Scale Industries, 2004.

RIS/SACEPS Regional Conference on SAARC:
Post-Islamabad Challenges, New Delhi, 31
August 2004.
Brainstorming on India-Brazil-South Africa
(IBSA) Economic Cooperation, New Delhi, 8
September 2004.

Biotechnology and Development: Challenges and
Opportunities for Asia by Sachin Chaturvedi and
S.R. Rao (eds.), published jointly by Institute of
Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore and RIS.

Seminar on the Agenda for G-8 under British
Presidency, New Delhi, 23 September 2004.

India-ASEAN Partnership in an Era of Globalization:
Reflections by Eminent Persons (Second imprint),
published jointly by Institute of Southeast Asian
Studies, Singapore and RIS.

India-ASEAN Eminent Persons Lecture by
Secretary-General, ASEAN, New Delhi, 18
October 2004.
High-Level Conference on Asian Economic
Integration: Vision of a New Asia, Tokyo, 18-19
November 2004.
ICWA/RIS/CSCAP Seminar on From Bali to
Vientiane: Road Map for India-ASEAN
Partnership, New Delhi, 24 November 2004.

RIS Policy Briefs
#13 UNCTAD XI and the Development Dialogue for the
21st Century
#14 Oil Shock and Cyclical Upturn in US Interest
Rates: Implications for Asia

209

Appendix XXI

RIS Discussion Papers
#86

Towards a Free Trade Area in South Asia: Charting
A Feasible Course for Trade Liberalisation with
Reference to India’s Role by Indra Nath Mukherji.

#85 Industrial Restructuring and Export Competitiveness
of the Textiles and Clothing Sector in SAARC in the
Context of MFA Phase-Out by Ram Upendra Das.
#84 India’s Export by Countries and Commodities: On the
Estimation of a Forecasting Model Using Panel Data
by Rajesh Mehta and Parul Mathur.
#83 Strategic Approach to Strengthening the International
Competitiveness in Knowledge Based Industries:Indian
Chemical Industry by Vijay Kumar Kaul.
#82 Strategic approach to Strengthening the International
Competitiveness in Knowledge Based Industries: The
Case of Indian Automotive Industry by Neelam Singh.
#81 Strategic approach to Strengthening the
InternationalCompetitiveness in Knowledge Based
Industries: Non-electrical Machinery Industry by M.
Padma Suresh.
#80 Strategic approach to Strengthening the International
Competitiveness in Knowledge Based Industries: The
Indian Pharmaceutical industry by Aradhna
Aggarwal.

#75 Transport Cooperation in BIMST-EC: Issues and Way
Forward by Prabir De.
#74 WTO Market Access Negotiations and Indian Small
Scale Industry by Rajesh Mehta and Pooja Agarwal.
#73 ASEAN-India Economic Relations: Current Status
and Future Prospects by Rahul Sen, Mukul G. Asher
and Ramkishen S. Rajan.
#72 National Innovation Systems and India’s IT
Capability: Are there any lessons for ASEAN
Newcomers? by Nagesh Kumar and K J Joseph.
#71 Monetary Cooperation in South Asia: Potential and
Prospects by Sweta Chaman Saxena and Mirza
Allim Baig.
#70 India-ASEAN Cooperation in Information and
Communication Technologies: Issues and Prospects by
K.J. Joseph and Govindan Parayil.
Journals
1.

South Asia Economic Journal (Vol. 5 No. 2) JulyDecember 2004.
2.

#79 Complementarities and Potentials of Intra-regional
Transfers of Investments, Technology and Skills in Asia
by Saikat Sinha Roy.
#78 Towards Formation of Close Economic Cooperation
among Asian Countries by S K Mohanty, Sanjib
Pohit and Saikat Sinha Roy.
#77 Transaction Costs as Barriers to Economic Integration
in Asia: An Empirical Exploration by Prabir De.
#76 Transforming Digital Divide into Digital Dividend: The
Role of South-South Cooperation in ICTs by K J
Joseph.

South Asia Economic Journal (Vol. 5 No. 1) JanuaryJune 2004.

Asian Biotechnology and Development Review, Vol.
6(2), March 2004.
Asian Biotechnology and Development Review, Vol. 6
No. 3, July 2004.

3.

New Asian Monitor, Vol. 1 No. 2, July 2004.
New Asian Monitor, Vol. 1 No. 3, October 2004.
New Asian Monitor, Vol. 2 No. 1, January 2005.

Newsletter
RIS Diary,Vol. 2 No. 2, April 2004.
RIS Diary,Vol. 2 No. 3, July 2004.
RIS Diary,Vol. 2 No. 4, October 2004.
RIS Diary,Vol. 3No. 1, January 2005.

210

Abbreviations

ACAFD

Advanced Courses on Asia for Foreign
Diplomats

ACD

Asian Cooperation Dialogue

AGPL

Actual Ground Position Line

ARF

ASEAN Regional Forum

ASEAN

Association of South-East Asian
Nations

ASI

Archeological Survey of India

BDR

Bangladesh Rifles

BIMSTEC

Bay of Bengal Initiative for MultiSectoral Technical And Economic
Cooperation.

BSF

Border Security Force

CAN

Community of ANDEAN Nations

CARICOM Caribbean Community
CBM

Confidence Building Measures

CD

Conference on Disarmament

CECA

Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation Agreement

CUNPK

Center for UN Peacekeeping

CWC

Chemical Weapons Convention

DPC

District Passport Cell

DPRK

Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea

ECOWAS

Economic Community of West
African States

EU

European Union

FICCI

Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry

FIEO

Federation of Indian Export
Organisations

FOC

Foreign Office Consultations

FSI

Foreign Service Institute

FTA

Free Trade Agreement

GCC

Gulf Cooperation Council

GCIM

Global Commission on International
Migration

GOI

Government of India

GSLV

Geosynchronous Satellite Launch
Vehicle

CEL

Central Electronics Limited

CEP

Cultural Exchange Programme

HAL

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited

CFY

Current Financial Year

HIPC

Heavily Indebted Poor Countries

CHOGM

Commonwealth Heads of
Government Meeting

HOM

Head of Mission

HOP

Head of Post

HTCG

High Technology Cooperation Group

IBSA

India, Brazil and South Africa

ICCR

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

ICWA

Indian Council of World Affairs

CICA

Conference on Interaction and
Confidence Building Measures in Asia

CII

Confederation of Indian Industry

CIS

Commonwealth of Independent States

CLMV

Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Vietnam

IFS

Indian Foreign Service

CLMV

Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Vietnam

IGNOU

COMESA

Community of Eastern and Southern
Africa

Indira Gandhi National Open
University

ILO

International Labour Organisation

IMO

International Maritime Organisation

IRIGC

Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental
Commission

CPIF

A Chinese Peoples Institute of Foreign
Affairs

CSCAP

Council for Security and Cooperation
in the Asia-Pacific

211

Abbreviations

ITEC

Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation

ITPO

Indian Trade Promotion Organisation

JCE

PTA

Preferential Trade Agreement

RITES

Rail India Technical Economic
Services

Joint Committee of Experts

ROK

Republic of Korea

JEC

Joint Economic Commission

SAARC

JSG

Joint Study Group

South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation

JTG

Joint Technical Group

SAFTA

South Asian Free Trade Area

JWG

Joint Working Group

SCAAP

Special Commonwealth Assistance
for Africa Plan

LAC

Latin American Countries

LCDS

Least Developed Contracting States

SCPD

Special Course for Palestinian
Diplomats

LOC

Line of Control

SICA

LTTE

Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam

System of Central American
Integration

MERCOSUR

Market of Southern Cone
Countries

SPDC

State Peace and Development Council

TCIL

MNA

Myanmar News Agency

Telecommunications Consultants
India Ltd

MoU

Memorandum of Understanding

TEAM-9

NAM

Non Aligned Movement

Techno-Economic Approach for
Africa India Movement

NATO

North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

UGC

University Grants Commission

NDC

National Defence College

UMFCCI

Union of Myanmar Federation of
Chambers of Commerce & Industry

NIDM

National Institute of Disaster
Management

UNCOPUOS

UN Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

NRI

Non Resident Indian

UNDC

NSCS

National Security Council Secretariat

United Nations Disarmament
Commission

NSSP

Next Steps in Strategic Partnership

UNGA

UN General Assembly

OECD

Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development

UNHCR

UN High Commissioner for Refugee

PCFD

Professional Course for Foreign
Diplomats

UNMEE

UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea

UNSC

United Nations Security Council

PIO

People of Indian Origin

UP A

United Progressive Alliance

PIS

Personnel Information System

WMD

Weapons of Mass Destruction

PLA

People’s Liberation Army

WTO

World Trade Organisation

212


